# Appendix

## The Hotshot Women

***[This document contains many of the notable women in the
Hotshot]{.underline} [community and is a continued work-in-progress by
way of discovery]{.underline} [and individual input. We are very aware
there are many other]{.underline} [notable women that were some of the
first Hotshots of their time, so,]{.underline} [we could use your help
with more discovery, photos and their]{.underline}
[career(s).]{.underline}***

***[Respectfully,]{.underline}***

David Provencio,
[[mso\_1977\@me.com]{.underline}](mailto:mso_1977@me.com)

**[Note from Carol Henson, Bear Divide Captain who will soon have a
book published for all to]{.underline} [read about the women in the
Fire Service:]{.underline}**

*"I did a lot of research and didn\'t come across anything that
mentions a requirement hiring of women, especially around 1978. Of
course, the Bernardi case that created the consent decree in Region 5
started around 1979, but it didn\'t affect hiring until many years
later. I think it was more pressure from management. The Civil Rights
Act really put pressure on the agencies to hire minorities - women,
Hispanics, African Americans, etc, which began around 1971. I have
found that documented."*

**1976** - **Sue Husari** - first woman hotshot - Lassen Hotshots in
Region 5 Regional Fire Management Officer, Pacific West Region NPS
Acting Associate Regional Director Communications, NPS

Deputy Director, Fire and Aviation Management, USFS -- Region 5 Asst.
Director, Fire and Aviation Management, USFS -- Region 5 Fire
Management Officer, Everglades National Park, NPS

Asst. Fire Management Officer, Everglades National Park, NPS

![](media/image194.jpeg){width="3.0994313210848645in"
height="3.0433333333333334in"}

**1976** - **Kimberly Brandel** -- Zig-Zag Hotshots

![](media/image195.jpeg){width="4.25in" height="2.3906244531933507in"}

**1976** - **Gloria "Glo" Eighmey** -- Morman Lake Hotshots (no photo)

**1979** -- **Danah Feldman** - first woman in an overhead position as
a squad boss - Mt Baker- Snoqualmie Hotshots (now the Baker River
Hotshots) in Region 6. After spending time as a squad boss on Mt
Baker-Snoqualmie Hotshots, Danah was offered a position at the Boise
Interagency Fire Center (now NIFC). She worked in fire for 7 years.
She's been working as a psychologist/child & family therapist out of
Seattle, WA.

![](media/image196.jpeg){width="2.4266338582677167in" height="3.5275in"}

**1981** -- **Beth Lund** - first woman hotshot foreman/captain -
Mendocino Hotshots in Region 5. Beth was a Type 1 IC with the Great
Basin/Rocky Basin Incident Management Team. She was a Zone FMO, Forest
Fire Management Officer on the Boise National Forest, and Deputy
Director, Fire and Aviation Management, Region 4

![](media/image197.jpeg){width="2.4843416447944007in"
height="4.25375in"}

**1989** -- **Margaret \"Maggie\" Doherty** - First Woman
Superintendent (detailed) -- Lolo Hotshots in Region 1 Lolo Hotshot
Superintendent, Fire Management Officer -- Seely Lake Ranger District,
Lolo National Forest, Region 1 Aviation Officer

![](media/image198.jpeg){width="2.420138888888889in" height="3.50625in"}

**1991 - Gina Papke** -- First Women Superintendent (permanent) -
Zigzag Hotshots

![](media/image199.jpeg){width="3.2582370953630795in" height="3.245in"}

***[Notable Hotshot Women of their time:]{.underline}***

**1981- 1983 Risa Lange-Navarro;** First women hotshot on

Big Horn (now Wyoming IHC) -- AFMO, Fire Use/Fuels Management, Fire
Behavior Analysis, Training Specialist -- Northern Rockies Training
Center, Fire Management Officer on the Ninemile Ranger District, Lolo
National Forest.

**1996-1997 - Mary Farnsworth**; Redmond IHC, First National Hotshot
Crew Coordinator.

**Erika "Rikki" Chamberlain**; Silver City and Negrito (1983-86) IHC,
on the Gila NF, El Cariso IHC, Captain on the Cleveland NF (1987).

![](media/image200.jpeg){width="3.7977887139107613in"
height="2.8366666666666664in"}

**Holly Maloney**; Superintendent Payson IHC, (1999) and Lolo IHC,
(2000).

**Kelly (Jones) Melott**, Roosevelt IHC, (2001-2002)

**Charlotte Wild Jordan**; Superintendent American River IHC, Tahoe NF
(2005), Zone FMO, Type 1 Safety Officer.

**Alissa Roeder**, Superintendent Pike IHC, (2006-2011)

**Margarita Phillips**; Lolo IHC, (1987), Smokejumper, marathon runner
(100 mile).

**Shawna Lagarza**, San Juan IHC Superintendent (2002-07"), National
Director, FAM, WO.

**Linda Adams,** Fulton IHC, Squad Boss, Captain, District
(1986-1988), Battalion Chief

**Iris Sager,** Chena IHC, Superintendent (current)

**Carol Henson**, Bear Divide IHC, Captain (1989-1990)

**Cathleen Lowe**, Silver City IHC (2006-2010), Mt. Taylor IHC,
(2011-2013)

**Sara (Knapp) Sweeney**, Baker River, and Bitterroot IHC, current
Superintendent Mormon Lake IHC

**Deb Blais**; Superintendent Redmond IHC, (2003-05, part of 06'),
left the agency currently works for TSA

**Candace Kutroski,** Superintendent Inyo (2012) and Horseshoe Meadow
IHC (2020)

**Pamela Messal**, Superintendent Black Mtn. IHC (2017-2018)

**Deanne Shulman,** Los Prietos IHC (1977-78), first women
Smokejumper, McCall, ID (1981-84)

**Mary Kwart,** Arrowhead IHC (1982-1983), first women with the Park
Service, also worked USFS, BLM, and F&WL

**Kim Maynard,** Bitteroot IHC, Smokejumper (1982), International
Disaster

**Leslie Anderson,** Lolo IHC, MSO Smokejumper, MTDC, District Ranger

**Eva Aragon,** Gila IHC (Negrito) (1980-9183), Squad Leader, Engines,
Heli-tack. Heli-tack Supervisor (1989-1995)

![](media/image201.jpeg){width="2.183778433945757in"
height="2.898020559930009in"}

**Laurie Perrett (researching) Bequi Livingston (researching)**

## Historical Articles

######## ADAPTING ADVANCED PRINCIPLES OF ORGANIZATION AND FIRE-LINE CONSTRUCTION TO CCC SUPPRESSION CREWS

ROLFE E. ANDERSON, BOYD L. RASMUSSEN, AND VERNE V. CHURCH

*Siskiyou National Forest*

Greater use of 40-man CCC crews in some regions was foreshadowed in
the April 1940 issue of Fire Control Notes (The 40-Man Crew- A Report
on Activities of the Experimental 40- Man Fire Suppression Crew) by
the statement: "It is believed that this system can be applied to
other crews organized from picked CCC enrollees..." The Siskiyou
organized a number of these crews and here reports on the success of
one of them. Region 6 now advised that every CCC Camp is required to
have a special 40-Man crew, and that steps are being taken to equip
these crews progressively.

In 1940, special suppression crews, patterned after the original
40-Man crew organized in 1939 on the Siskiyou National Forest and
located at the Redwood Ranger Station, were set-up in CCC camps and
forest-guard organizations on most of the national forests in the
North Pacific region. A 40-Man CCC crew was organized at the Iron
Mountain spike camp, China Flat CCC camp, on the Siskiyou, in the
spring of 1904.

About midseason, David P. Goodwin, Assistant Chief, Division of Fire
Control, in the Washington office, observed this crew on a practice
demonstration and was so impressed by its action and apparent high
level of morale, that he requested a report on the organization of the
crew, methods of training, and accomplishments on fires. The story of
experiences and accomplishments which follows might be duplicated by
any one of several forests in region 6 where similar CCC crews were
trained.

**Organization of Crew**

1.  *Selection of men.-* In making up the China Flat CCC 40-man crew, an
    effort was make to select enrollees who were best fitted physically
    and emotionally for fire- fighting duties. The best men were taken
    from work crews on every work project. In some cases this caused a
    temporary handicap to current projects, but it resulted in
    development of a suppression crew made up of better-than-average
    enrollees. The majority of the men were accustomed to hard work at
    relatively low wage rates.

Two of the best qualified CCC foremen in the camp, Walter Barklow and
Ralph Reeves, were chosen to take charge of the crew-Barklow as head
foreman and Reeves as assistant foreman. These men are in charge of
the road construction project on which the crew was engaged while not
training or fighting fire. In this way the men on the fire crew worked
under the same foreman at all times, resulting in a unity of thought
and action essential for good teamwork and the up-building of morale.

2.  *Selection of site.-* The Iron Mountain spike camp, where a
    road-construction project was in progress, was chosen as the most
    favorable site for the development of the crew. It provided work
    necessary fro the training and conditioning of the men. It was
    located in a place where it could provide quick service for two
    ranger districts; and, not

the least important, it kept the crew in a unit during off-duty time.
No outside influence interfered with the concentration of interest of
every man on fire duty.

![](media/image202.jpeg){width="5.826040026246719in"
height="3.446665573053368in"}

The men were housed in tents which were framed and floored. Mess was
provided in a portable frame building. The camp met all Army
regulations as to water supply, sanitation, and camp facilities.

**Training**

Training began soon after the spring enrollment and was carried on 1
day per week during the first half of the summer. After the crew had
gained experience on going fires, one-half day per week was considered
ample. Intensive training was in progress at the time of the July
enrollment and the few recruits that were added to the crew were
absorbed into the organization and given individual attention as
needed. Training processes were segregated into five divisions: Use of
tools; get-away action; fire-line construction; special job training;
and off-the-job training.

*Use of tools.-* Fundamental training in the use of hand tools was
necessary because many of the enrollees included in the crew were
green recruits. The first step in training was to teach every man the
correct use of an ax. Only a relatively few enrollees were judged
proficient in ax work following the first tryout. Detailed
instructions in handling an ax were given to each unskilled enrollee
under the close supervision of the foreman. As the men became
qualified in ax work they were excused from further training with this
tool.

The individual detailed training was done on road right-of-way logs
arranged in safe positions for the unskilled axmen. This step involved
training for a minimum of 1 day to a total of 5 days before all
enrollees were qualified to use the ax. After the

necessary skill was acquired in the fundamentals of ax work, practice
was continued throughout the summer on the road right-of-way clearing
project.

A similar system was used in teaching the use of digging tools. It was
found that less time was required to gain proficiency in these less
exacting tools.

*Get-away action and travel to fire.-* This share of training was
considered vitally important because it eliminated much waste of time
which would have occurred had the men not known exactly what they
should do in getting away to a fire with full equipment. To facilitate
assembling of men for roll call, loading into trucks, unloading and
receiving packs at the point where foot travel began, the men were
numbered from 1 to 40, according to position in the crew. Each man's
pack was tagged with his number so that each individual would receive
his designated tool. Packs and tools were stored in a separate
building at the spike camp and a truck assigned for transporting them.

A separate crew, consisting of the regular spike crew cookhouse staff,
who were not members of the 40-man crew, were trained to load this
equipment while the suppression-crew members were getting their work
clothes and loading into two passenger trucks which were assigned to
the crew.

Considerable time was spent practicing get-away on fire calls and by
constant practice, get-away time was reduced to 7 minutes when
enrollees were at camp at the time of the fire call. Training also
included unloading from the trucks at the point where foot travel
began and assembling in hiking order with packs and tools. Unloading
required 2 minutes and the receiving of tools about 5 minutes. The
crew was then hiked over trails and cross country to gain practice and
get the "feel of the pack."

*Fire-line construction.-* The next training step was actual fire-line
construction. This training included a demonstration of what a model
fire line should be, followed by practice in the construction of such
fire line. The crew worked as a unit using the one- lick method of
fire-line construction exclusively under all fuel types found on the
Siskiyou National Forest. The important element in the one-lick method
was the spacing of the men, coupled with the regulation of the speed
of construction. This was taught by actual practice of line
construction in the various types likely to be encountered on a going
fire. Training was carried on 1 day a week until the crew had reached
the necessary degree of proficiency, and one-half day per week
thereafter even after the crew had gained experience on going fires.
Practically all of the line constructed during training was located
around slash areas where the work was needed for hazard reduction and
fire protection.

*Training for special jobs.-* Outstanding men were given special
training on fire- line scouting, line location, speed regulation,
burning out, and cooking. Most of these important jobs were
necessarily taught during line-construction practice, although
additional training was given off the job. Cooking dehydrated rations
required some experimenting which was done in camp at the cook house
by the men selected for the cooking detail.

*Off-the-job training.-* The foregoing training was done entirely
during regular CCC work hours. In addition, however, the foremen gave
off-the-job training in safety, fire behavior, and similar subjects.

**Recreation and Morale**

Recreational facilities available were utilized as fully as possible
to build morale.

Each man proudly wore a red felt shield-shaped barge, stenciled "CCC,
40." Considerable competition developed among other members for the
"CCC, 40" positions. When the boys went to town on recreation trips,
all fire fighting equipment and clothes accompanied the crew.

**Equipment and Supplies**

Each member of the crew carried a pack of tools and equipment,
weighing about 36 pounds, similar to the ones used by the by the 1939
Siskiyou 40-man crew. Extra tools and supplies ere carried in to
supply truck. Lightweight goose-down sleeping bags and ample,
condensed, high-quality rations are two essential items of equipment.
The ration list was adapted from the list used by the 40-man crew in
1939, and weighed 11 ⅞ pounds for 1 man 3 days.

Most of the food items were packed in individual sizes, but it was
found most practicable not to break some of the items down into
individual packages. The quantities were so distributed that each pack
weighed about the same. Linen tags were attached to each pack listing
the items it contained so that the cook could easily determine which
pack to open so secure rations for any one meal. A few sad experiences
with spilled food demonstrated that it was important that the rations
be packed in cloth sacks as paper bags would not endure the wear and
tear of cross-country travel.

The question of whether or not to carry prepared lunches was carefully
considered in the operation of the crew. It was decided that prepared
lunches would be packed of securing them did not delay get-away action
and travel to fire. If the time did not allow for preparation of
lunch, the first meal on the fire line was made from items requiring
no cooking. Plans were made to obtain lunches if possible en route to
the fire by ordering them by phone at some point along the route. This
method was used in travel to one fire in 1940.

Fire packs and rations were always stored in complete readiness in the
spike camp where they were hung in sequence of numbers in double rows
on the walls of a special fire-equipment shed. In case of fire these
packs were loaded into a truck in reverse order from which they were
issued at the end of truck travel. They were placed flat in the truck
bed in tiers three deep. In order to eliminate lost motion and
misplacement of packs, the equipment truck driver placed all packs in
the truck when loading and removed them when unloading at the point
where foot travel began.

**Transportation**

Two truck drivers not members of the crew, ate and slept on each of
the three 1 ½

-ton trucks used.

**Action on Fires**

The CCC 40-man crew took complete action or assisted on seven fires
during the fire season. The name, size, and dominant fuel type of each
of these fires are listed in to following table:

*List of fires fought by the CCC suppression crew*

+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Name      | Date      | Area in   | Held line | Fuel Type |
|             |             | Acres     | in        |             |
|             |             |             |           |             |
|             |             |             | chains    |             |
+=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
| Lone Tree | July 06,  | 7.0       | 40        | MM        |
| Creek     | 1940      |             |             |             |
|           |             |             |             |             |
| fire      |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Scott     | July 06,  | 7.0       | 51        | HM        |
| Creek     | 1940      |             |             |             |
| fire      |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Green     | August    | 32.0      | 80        | MH        |
| Knob fire | 07, 1940  |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Two Mile  | August    | .2        | 7         | MM        |
| fire      | 10, 1940  |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Bingham   | August    | 30.0      | 85        | MM        |
|           | 11, 1940  |             |             |             |
| Mountain  |             |             |             |             |
| fire      |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Scott     | August    | 23.0      | 126       | HM        |
| Creek     | 21, 1940  |             |             |             |
| fire      |             |             |             |             |
|           |             |             |             |             |
| \#2       |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Water     | September | 15.5      | 58        | MH        |
| Pipe      | 01, 1940  |             |             |             |
| Creek     |             |             |             |             |
|           |             |             |             |             |
| fire      |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

No time studies were made on speed of line construction for this crew
while on fires, but it is well known that their accomplishments were
much greater than those of an average CCC crew of 40 men, and better
than the average crew composed of pick-up laborers.

Six of the seven fires upon which action was taken during the season
were of incendiary origin. Five of them were located on the Agness
Ranger District within a

3-mile radius and were presumably set by the same person or persons.
These incendiary fires were set at times when burning conditions were
most critical, and the prompt control by the CCC 40-man crew with the
assistance of forest guards and other CCC enrollees is considered a
fine accomplishment.

The following comments on one fire based on firemen's and dispatchers
notes are indicative of the rapid getaway, fast travel, and hard
striking power of this fire-fighting team.

*The Bingham Mountain Fire.-* The CCC 40-man crew was called at 5:30
p.m., and instructed to proceed to the Bingham Mountain fire. The men
were in camp at this time and no time was lost in assembling the crew.
Truck travel distance to the fire totaled 31 miles. The crew arrived
at the fire at 7:50 p.m., and immediately went to work. Three squads
of men were already working on the fire. The 40-man crew took over the
line construction work and the other squads were assigned to line
holding and burning out. At 11 p.m. the crew had built 5,610 feet of
fire line to control the fire trail there were a number of burning
snags and these were felled as the fire line progressed. The crew did
and exceptionally fine job on this 30-acre fire.

**Summary and Conclusions**

In organizing this crew, 40 better-than-average men were selected from
all current projects. Because of loss of experienced men during
reenrollment periods, many green men were also selected and much
fundamental training was given in the use of hand tools.

It was found desirable that all men in the crew attain a certain
degree of skill in ax work. After training the entire crew, the most
adept axmen were chosen for ax work on the established crew. Learning
to use the hoe and shovel is a relatively simple accomplishment after
the enrollees attained a degree of skill with the ax.

As a suggestion for future crews of this type, it is believed
advisable to provide a snag-falling or road-clearing project on which
to train fellers and axmen beginning about 6 months before the opening
of fire season. Experience has shown that at least that much time is
necessary to develop green enrollees into experienced timber fellers.

Two CCC foremen are necessary for a crew of 40-men. These foremen must
possess real leadership ability and should be well qualified in fire
fighting, training, and morale building. Pride in accomplishment must
be tactfully instilled into each member of the crew by the foreman. He
must be able to mix with the crew in a judicious way and at all times
keep the respect of the men.

CCC crews have these outstanding differences from civilian crews of
the same

type:

1.  Qualifications required of candidates for the civilian crews call
    for experience in use of hand tools. A large percent of CCC
    candidates are inexperienced and must be given fundamental training
    in the use of tools.

2.  CCC crews will respond more readily to systematic training since
    they are more amendable to discipline and will adapt themselves
    without question to the positions assigned in this form of
    fire-fighting team.

A high degree of morale is the most essential attribute of this type
of organization.

To cultivate this rather intangible spirit so necessary in a
first-rate crew, much attention was given to recreation, good food,
and work shifts on the fire line not excessively long with short rest
periods as judged necessary by the foreman in charge.

The psychological effect of fast progress in line construction
resulting in a quick decisive suppression of each fire attacked gave
rise to ever-increasing confidence of each member in the strength of
the unit. A series of failures would no doubt produce the reverse
effect. It is especially important with an inexperienced crew that the
first attempt be successful. Not the least important, from the
enrollees' viewpoint, was the distinctive 40-man badge differentiating
these men from other CCC men which fostered a healthy pride in the
organization.

The special CCC 40-man fire-suppression crew demonstrated that CCC
enrollees organized and trained in accordance with advanced principles
of organization and fire- line construction were superior to the
average CCC fire-fighting crew which does not have the advantage of
special training and lightweight equipment; and better than the
majority of civilian fire crews composed of pick-up laborers.

*This article recognizes the development of American Indian forest and
wildland firefighters in the Southwest United States and their
important contributions to firefighting nationwide. It provides an
historical look*

*at the purpose behind the original creation of Indian fire warriors
and why the firefighter was---and remains---so important to American
Indians individually and in tribal communities.*

F IR E

**WA R R IORS**

***AMERICAN INDIAN FIREFIGHTERS IN THE SOUTHWEST***

S

low, many Indian men and women battle fires each year. While high
unemployment rates encourage men and women to do so, many American
Indians fight fires as a matter of pride.

Little effort was made to manage or preserve the nation's (or tribal)
timber resources until the early twentieth century. In March 1909,
Congress authorized the United States Indian Service to implement
measures to preserve "living and growing timber," remove "dead timber,
standing or fallen," and to "advise" the Indian tribes in caring for
their forests. Armed with this autho- rization, Interior Secretary
Richard A. Ballinger established the Indian Forest Service, which
immediately established fire patrols and fire cabins on several
reservations in the north. After installing 1,500 miles of telephone
lines, most Indian fire lookouts were linked with fire control
agencies. In 1913, the Indian Service, lack- ing the funds, manpower
and expertise to implement a preven- tion program, entered into a
cooperative agreement with United States Forest Service (USFS) to
prevent and suppress fires bor- dering Indian and USFS lands.1

While fire protection and suppression were the cornerstones of USFS
policy in the 1920s, private and Indian land holdings con-

tinued to lag in developing effective fire protection. J.P. Kinney,
Chief Forester for the Indian Service, argued that although the fed-
eral government was trustee of Indian lands, it did not provide
adequate funds for fire suppression. In 1927, Congress allocated

\$50,000 of tribal trust fund monies for emergency fire protection and
appropriated an additional \$50,000 for fire suppression on Indian
lands. Fire prevention nonetheless remained secondary to suppression
due to insufficient funds to manage tribal timberlands and the lack of
organized and trained Indian forest firefighting crews. In 1930, the
Indian Service reorganized its Forest Service as the Division of
Forestry and Grazing, adding thirty-five million acres of Indian
grazing land to the seven million acres of tribal timberland for which
it already had land management and fire control responsibility.2

During the depression, Franklin Roosevelt established the Emergency
Conservation Work program---better known as the Civilian Conservation
Corps (CCC)---to help protect national timber and grazing lands. When
federal agencies expressed appre- hension over administering the CCC
in Indian Country, the Indian Service secured approval to maintain its
own CCC Indian Division.

***BY DAVID H. DEJONG***

FOREST HISTORY TODAY \| SPRING/FALL 2004 **45**

![](media/image203.png){width="7.2640857392825895in"
height="5.493333333333333in"}

*Santo Domingo (New Mexico) Indian firefighter in action on the
Sitgreaves National Forest in Arizona, June 1956.*

In the program's first year, a staggering \$9,570,000 was made avail-
able for conservation work in Indian Country, three times what the
Indian Service had requested as part of a five year plan in 1927.
Between 1933 and 1942, when the program was discontinued, the CCC
Indian Division built nearly 100 fire lookout towers, installed 7,500
miles of telephone line, and built 600 cabins to help detect and
prevent forest and range fires. Large forested areas that had
previously been inaccessible were opened by trails, signifi- cantly
reducing the time required to reach fires. In addition, two Indian
forest fire training schools were established. Two-thirds of the
conservation work in the first year of the program was done on
reservations in Arizona, New Mexico, Montana and South Dakota.3
Despite the accomplishments of the CCC Indian Division, the Indian
Service fire suppression budget did not permit training Indian fire
crews. When World War II preempted the depression-era programs,
funding sources diminished; many roads, fuelbreaks, hazard reductions
and other fire prevention measures in Indian Country fell into
disrepair.

When the war ended, the USFS, through its wartime liaisons with civil
defense and military agencies, found new means to replace those funds
lost with the advent of war. For the first time, the USFS was able to
organize and train firefighting crews with fire control viewed as "a
paramilitary service of national defense."

Fire itself was typed as the enemy. To control fires in Indian
Country, the Indian Service extended its cooperative agreement with
the USFS in 1952 and developed a new one with the National Park
Service.4

**MODERN DAY FIRE WARRIORS**

The opening of new wilderness areas to the public by the CCC and
increased tourist traffic to national scenic areas greatly added to
the threat of fire in the post-war years. On the Mescalero Apache
Reservation, in south central New Mexico, increased tourist
traffic---along with drought conditions---resulted in increased fire
damage to tribal timber. Responding to the crisis,

A.B. "Bert" Shields, a ranger for thirty years on the Mescalero
Reservation, sent out word in the spring of 1948 that he was orga-
nizing a trained Apache firefighting crew. "I hope to help you fel-
lows organize into a group that will make history in the Southwest,"
Shields told nineteen Apache men, most of whom were World War II
veterans. In announcing his intentions, Shields told prospective
firefighters to "bring along another man you think might have what it
takes to be a red hatted fire eater."5

The newly organized crew met weekly to train, practice line-building
routines, and experiment with firefighting tools in

**46** FOREST HISTORY TODAY \| SPRING/FALL 2004

![](media/image204.png){width="7.255391513560805in"
height="4.826666666666667in"}*Red Hat firefighters on the Mendocino
National Forest, California, August 1951. These Mescalero Apache
Indians from New Mexico were flown in from their reservation to fight
the fire.*

a variety of terrain. Within months, the Red Hats received their first
fire call. "We were in a timbered canyon of yellow pine where the fire
was running through the tops of the trees," Apache fire- fighter Rufus
Lester recalled.

*The boys built their line while Shields watched the flames from a
ridge. We couldn't see the fire, but we could sure hear it roaring
towards us. Shields shouted orders for us to stay on the line, but at
the last minute we got scared, dropped our tools and ran. Of course
the line held. Shields was pretty disgusted. Pretty soon all of us
sheeped Indians came back to pick up our tools. He didn't have to say
a word.*

The Apaches never again panicked, demonstrating complete faith in
their fire lines. On a different day, when strong winds swept the
flames into a narrow canyon "with such ferocity that the sector boss
yelled for \[the Red Hats\] to retreat," Lester "qui- etly told his
men: 'I guess we hold it here.' The line held."6

In 1949, the USFS used the Red Hat crew on a fire in Lincoln National
Forest, lying adjacent to the Mescalero Reservation, and found them
"to be very good." By 1950, the Red Hats won acclaim for their work on
the Bonito and Weed-Mayhill fires in New Mexico's Lincoln National
Forest.7 That same summer the Red Hats commanded a sector of the
17,000-acre Capitan fire in Lincoln National Forest that scorched the
paws of the now infa- mous bear Smokey.

Within two years, the Red Hats were called to battle fires throughout
Forest Service Region 3 (Arizona and New Mexico). In 1950, crews from
Mescalero and Hopi were dispatched to bat- tle a fire in California,
the first time Indian crews were sent out- side of their home region.
When they arrived in San Bernardino National Forest, they faced a new
type of fire environment: "brush so thick a man couldn't walk." On
arrival, the Indian fire- fighters were sent to the roughest
terrain---the steep, rocky hill- sides. Ranger John Hayward, who
accompanied the Indians to the fire site, opined that "a white man
would have given up when he learned how hard it was to cut that brush,
but those Indians kept chopping and digging until I wondered if they
ever took time to breathe." Later that summer, when the crew was sent
to the Jimjam fire in Trinity National Forest, in northern California,
six Apaches were taken by helicopter "to the inaccessible head of the
fire" and within thirty minutes had built a controlling fire line. The
rest of the crew worked fourteen hours clearing a line to the
firehead.8

In 1954, the Red Hats were awarded the Interior Department's top honor
for meritorious service by distinguishing themselves "for gallant
performance in service and for conservation and pre- vention of
destruction of our natural resources." In customary fashion, Lester
turned to his Apache comrades and told them fire- fighting was not a
one-man job. "It was you who worked and trained for the job and
performed that job when the need was there." The Red Hats had earned a
reputation, one contemporary

FOREST HISTORY TODAY \| SPRING/FALL 2004 **47**

![](media/image205.png){width="7.2547036307961505in"
height="5.333333333333333in"}

*Bureau of Land Management foreman, Calvin Jorgensen, instructs the
crew of Ute Indians at the Utah Cooperative Fire Fighters training
sessions on the Ashley National Forest about firefighting tactics, May
1953.*

writer observed, as forest firefighters "only a cut or so below super-
man."9

Although the Red Hats were the first organized Indian crew, they were
not the last. In 1949, a Hopi crew was established and, in 1951, a
joint USFS/Indian Service training program prepared Navajo and Pueblo
Indians for emergency fire suppression. The program provided training
in safety precautions, first aid, use of tools and fire fighting
procedures.10 That same year the Zuni Thunderbirds were formally
organized, although they had pre- viously fought fires as an untrained
adjunct unit. Within several years, 250 Indians from Zuni, 50 from
Taos, 25 each from Jemez, Zia, and Cochiti as well as 100 Hopis had
completed the course. In 1952, the USFS, National Park Service, Indian
Service and Bureau of Land Management coordinated their efforts to
orga- nize and train Indian fire crews, with representatives from each
agency meeting annually to discuss common challenges and improvements
in fire suppression procedures.

Indian firefighters from Arizona and New Mexico quickly won fame. For
their efforts in Trinity National Forest, the Red Hats were decorated
with praise from the district ranger. "This type of crew is far and
above any other crew used on the fire," the ranger explained. "Their
discipline, fire camp manners, and gen- eral behavior make them an
outstanding crew, not even consid-

ering their fire fighting efforts. As for line construction, I per-
sonally would prefer one 25-man Indian crew to any other three 25-man
crews." In 1954, the Zuni Thunderbirds were rewarded for their
training and received a unit citation from the US Department of
Agriculture for "meritorious services as unusu- ally skillful, hardy
and courageous" firefighters. Due to their ded- ication and hard work,
other crews referred to the Thunderbirds as "human bulldozers." The
Thunderbirds were the first called to so-called *project fires*---or
fires too large to be handled locally--- in Arizona and New Mexico.11

Demand for Indian fire crews led to the organization of other crews,
some of which fought fires with little or no training. A Zuni
firefighter recalled the days of unorganized crews as a time when the
firefighters "didn't have no helmets, no nothing. We were just wearing
our clothes and hats." Whoever walked the quickest on the fireline
became crew foreman. A Taos firefighter remembered that all you had to
do was "know how to swing the axe and use the shovel." Even without
training, unorganized Indian crews proved to be excellent
firefighters.12

By 1951, the first year of large-scale employment of Indian
firefighters, some 2,000 fire warriors from the Southwest were
battling fires. That same year they were organized as the Southwest
Indian Forest Firefighters (SWIFF), with each crew

**48** FOREST HISTORY TODAY \| SPRING/FALL 2004

consisting of 21 trained firefighters, three straw bosses and one crew
leader. Clarence Collins, chief of fire control for USFS Region 3,
praised the Indian crews but believed that no more than 750
firefighters should be organized until an exact need could be
determined. By 1961, requests for organized SWFF crews could not be
filled, despite the fact that there were 1,500 Indians approved as
firefighters.13

By the early fifties, Indian crews from Region 3 were flown to battle
fires in Montana, Idaho, Colorado, California and Washington, in
addition to Arizona and New Mexico. With Indian crews in demand, and
because of the success of the SWFF Indian crews, other tribes sought
to organize crews. In 1953, crews were organized from the Crow,
Northern Cheyenne and Blackfeet tribes in Montana. Following the lead
of SWFF, 1,200 firefight- ers from seven reservations in Montana and
Idaho created an organization known as Montana Indian Firefighters
(MIF) in 1955. After a disastrous fire season in Alaska in 1957, the
Bureau of Land Management organized crews among the Indians and
Eskimos of Alaska, as well.14

Wherever Indian fire crews were organized, they were deemed among the
best due, in part, to a deep sense of pride and their *esprit de
corps*. A veteran Taos firefighter recalled an experience when his
crew was sent to battle a blaze in Idaho. Upon arrival, the crew was
told they would be transported 86 miles into the wilderness along with
an Alaska Native crew from Ft. Yukon. "The crew representatives were
laughing," the Snowball fire- fighter recalled, "because the \[USFS\]
officials were talking about who was going to last out there \[in the
wilderness\], the Indians and the Alaskans It was a compliment and
made me feel

good."15

Because of their accomplishments in defending the land against
destructive fires, American Indian firefighters developed a deep sense
of pride in their work. Blackfeet firefighter Joe Bear explained in
1987:

*As long as I can remember, Indian firefighters have taken pride in
fighting fires. They didn't want to be second best, they wanted to be
number one in this field. Not only does firefighting bring pres- tige
and pride, but it also creates employment for men and women.*

*It helps our economic situation by bringing money home to pay rent
and buy clothes for the families The Tribe stands 100 per-*

*cent behind us and expects us to act as tribal emissaries.*16

Pride in their work, in turn, was a big factor in the success of
Southwest Indian firefighters. Tribal leaders considered their actions
a reflection of the tribe. They sought to do a good job, and they did.
A legacy of fire knowledge, pride and a competi- tive spirit helped
establish the quality of firefighters. Good-natured inter-tribal
jesting enhanced this competitiveness. The Hopis, very serious and
quiet, were battling a fire in the Mount Wilson Wilderness Area in
northwestern Arizona. Charlie Shamte, a Mescalero firefighter "led the
remarks of the laughing and bois- terous Apaches by stating, 'What's
the matter with the Hopis? They don't get any fun fighting fires.
Nobody knows a joke.' As the Zunis arrived to replace the Apaches for
the night shift, Shamte hollered, 'It's a hot devil. You probably
won't hold it, but we'll stop it for you in the morning'."17 In turn,
the Zunis believed they were better firefighters than the Navajos
because they were better walkers and superior in using a shovel, an
axe and a Pulaski,

all of which were viewed as natural extensions of the Zuni. As well,
they believed that centuries of farming prepared them to work harder
and longer in the open, scorching sun.

In addition to their work habits and accomplishments, there were a
number of reasons Indian firefighters were so highly val- ued. Pueblo
crews, including the Hopi and Zuni, were better organized than
non-Indian crews because they came from a close- knit communal social
structure. Pueblo lifestyles were "strict and discipline high."
Consequently, they typically set the pace that other crews had to
maintain or face being dropped from the pro- gram. The writer of a
Phoenix-based magazine suggested in 1961 that SWFF Indian crews were
exemplary firefighters because complaint was seen "as a sign of
weakness." S.T. Carlson, regional forester for the National Park
Service in Santa Fe, argued that the SWFF Indian crews were successful
because they were very safety conscious and somehow had "the ability
to work with a mini- mum of accidents." They also seemed to have an
"inherent qual- ity that causes them to sense danger."18

Although a competitive spirit was visible among the crews, individual
glory was not sought nor permitted on the fire lines. Shields was
careful to note that the Red Hats did not seek indi- vidual glory from
their job, but worked "so in unison that they are not considered as
individuals but as an intricate machine which turns out a precision
job." Indian firefighters, above all, were team members. As such, they
were assigned to the hottest and roughest sectors of the fire. The
SWFF Indian crews were rated as "greatly superior in efficiency" to
other crews.19

The Mescalero Red Hats, as was true of other Indian crews, viewed
firefighting as modern day *warfare*. The Apaches believed how one
approached the fire site was important. One did not walk to the
*battle site*; one trotted in military fashion. As they trot- ted, the
Red Hats sang war songs to help them maintain the pace. A logger
returning from the 1950 Capitan fire in New Mexico found the Red Hat
approach admirable. "We had a long uphill hike before we reached the
fire line. Me and my crew was so puffed when we got there we couldn't
do a lick of work 'till we got our wind. But you should have seen
those Red Hats. They dogtrotted all the way up the mountain and fell
to line building the minute they hit the fire."20

Because of the historical relationship that American Indians had with
fire, spiritual and ceremonial practices were often encountered at the
fire site. When a crew of Navajo Scouts was called to battle a
40,000-acre blaze in Gila National Forest in the 1950s, they first
listened to their leader sing and say a prayer. While USFS officials
questioned the timing of the ceremony, Pat Murray, USFS liaison to the
Scouts, explained: "You can't hurry an Indian. He has to know the why,
where, when and how about this firefighting business."21

Indian ceremonies seem to have more than once proven suc- cessful. In
the 1950 Gaston fire, in San Bernardino National Forest, a fire jumped
the firebreak and sped up a hill. An Apache crew attacked the fire but
seemed to make no progress in containing it. In near desperation, the
Apaches withdrew from the fire and began singing. When they returned
to the fire, it continued to spread for a few minutes and then, for no
apparent natural reason, it "lay down and was easily controlled." When
Forest Ranger W.L. Graves asked what had happened, he was told the
firefighters made med- icine with their songs, causing the fire to lie
down naturally.22

On another occasion, a Hopi crew was battling a fire in Southern

FOREST HISTORY TODAY \| SPRING/FALL 2004 **49**

![](media/image206.png){width="7.262211286089239in"
height="5.013333333333334in"}

*Indian firefighters on the Gila National Forest, New Mexico, in 1951.
This was the McKnight Fire, a 41,000-acre fire that crowned out
continually, often sweeping over back-fire areas and across the fire
line into virgin territory.*

California when it decided to hold a rain ceremony. Within two hours
there was "a veritable cloudburst." All that remained of the fire was
a mass of "steaming mud." Later, the Zunis and Apaches held a rain
ceremony while battling a fire in Idaho. Ranger Paul Weld was elated
with the result: "Our sector was the only place that got a shower the
next day." On another fire in California, Zuni firefighters carved
religious symbols and figures on the alder trees lining the creek
where the fire line was located. When they were reprimanded for
defacing the trees, the Thunderbirds justified their actions by
pledging "fire would not cross a line that was guarded by the symbols
and figures." The fire line held.23

In later years, the spiritual aspect of firefighting---particularly
among younger firefighters---diminished, although some cere- monies
are still evident among firefighters. A Mescalero Apache remarked that
while older firefighters were "very religious \[and\] there were a lot
of prayers and songs," today's firefighters have it "within
themselves, not really showing it." In addition, some crewmembers
carry sacred medicine with them to the fireline as a source of
protection. In a 2001 interview, Randy Pretty on Top, a Crow
firefighter from Montana, spoke for many American Indian firefighters
when he said fire fighting today is a lot "like the old warrior
society" of yesteryear when physical strength and spiritual power
enable tribal societies to defend themselves against the enemy.24

The tactical fire policy of the USFS---and indirectly the Indian

Service---changed after the mid 1950s. While the USFS empha- sized
manpower as the predominant method of suppressing fires prior to the
middle fifties, it emphasized mechanization and fire research after.
New strategies and weapons were introduced to aid in the battle
against wildland and forest fires. Airplanes and helicopters were used
to drop chemical retardants and water on fires, and helicopters were
used to drop specially trained fire crews near fire lines. Increased
mechanization resulted in bulldozers, chainsaws, four-wheel drive
vehicles and other resources invad- ing the fire scene. In the 1990s,
Global Positioning System (GPS) mapping and aerial reconnaissance were
added to the fire fight- ing strategies. Yet, despite mechanization
and technical improve- ments, the principal burden continues to fall
on the firefighters in the field. On the major fires in the West, that
burden contin- ued to fall on American Indian firefighters. In 2001,
Jim Stires, chief of the Bureau of Indian Affairs' branch of fire
manage- ment, argued Indian fire fighters were still "at the top of
the list as the most desired fire fighters."25

When SWFF Indian crews were organized, they were in high demand
throughout the West. The money earned from fighting fires constituted
an important source of cash-income to the fire- fighters. Since many
Indian firefighters worked as ranchers or artists, or were unemployed,
the fire call could be easily accom- modated. This readiness factor,
combined with working in a rugged environment that many Indians were
used to, as well as

**50** FOREST HISTORY TODAY \| SPRING/FALL 2004

![](media/image207.png){width="7.263975284339457in"
height="4.36in"}*Indian firefighters putting out a burning stump in
June 1956 on the Sitgreaves National Forest, Arizona.*

the manpower shortage in the post war years, made Indians a logical
choice. Indian firefighters were initially attracted to their work
because of economics. "Firefighting employment was wel- comed \[in the
mid-fifties\]," Ruben Romero, a Tiwa from Taos Pueblo and a
firefighter since 1955, explained in a 1990 interview, "because of the
high unemployment at the time. When the

green \[USFS\] truck drove up, we were attracted to it like flies."
Romero knew that "firefighting to the Indian was money" even though
his heart told him it was much more than that. "It was necessary for
the preservation of the old Indian ways."26

Bleak economic conditions on the reservations served to push many
Indians into firefighting. The demand for manpower and the
attractiveness of cash income pulled them. In 1950, the first year in
which Indian crews were used outside of Indian Country, the Mescalero
Apaches earned \$10,000 fighting fires. The fol- lowing year, the
gross earnings of the Apaches, Hopis and Zunis exceeded \$100,000.
During the 1953 fire season, the Red Hats brought home over \$40,000.
By 1954, SWFF Indian crews were earning \$500,000 per year. That
figured rose to \$1.5 million by 1961.27 As a source of employment,
firefighting also helped restore and enhance self-esteem.

In 1961, after nearly a dozen years of discussion, the USFS fur- ther
modified its tactical policy by training a rapid deployment
firefighting force known as an Interregional Fire Suppression Crew.
These rapid deployment "hotshot" crews were made up of non-Indian USFS
personnel and were trained to suppress fires on short notice anywhere
in the United States. An elite and highly trained and self-sufficient
crew, the hotshot crews arrived as a package, bringing with them their
own tools and supplies. Within two years, there were nine such crews,
each of which consisted

of forty highly trained firefighters.

Corresponding with the increase in hotshot crews was a decline in SWFF
Indian crews. The manpower shortage experi- enced by the USFS after
World War II, which at one time ham- pered fire suppression efforts
and led to the utilization of SWFF Indian crews, had been largely
overcome. The added expense of sending Indian crews outside of their
home region was also no longer cost-effective. To reduce costs and
attack fires more quickly, fire suppression efforts focused on the
closest-first policy, mean- ing crews closest to a fire were the first
dispatched. The use of USFS hotshots, the increased utilization of
non-Indian seasonal firefighters, prohibitions against retaining SWFF
crews on standby for more than two weeks and several slow fire seasons
all led to a declining use of SWFF crews.28

The declining use of Indian crews also had other points of ori- gin,
including the introduction of fitness tests in the 1970s. Fighting
fires, in the words of fire management specialist Jim Abbott, "is one
of man's most strenuous jobs. Working on steep terrain and in a hot,
smoky environment demands maximum energy output." As a safety
precaution, the USFS established mandatory physical fitness standards
in 1975, with all firefighters subject to the new standards. To
measure physical endurance and stamina, firefight- ers were required
to take---and pass---a five-minute step test.29

When Indian crews were first organized, firefighters came from a
cultural and social background that required a "different lifestyle
... \[with men\] ... more involved in physical labor." When many
veteran firefighters began leaving the SWFF program in the late
sixties, they were replaced by younger, less physically fit
firefighters. By 1970, the composition of fire crews had changed.
Where once firefighters were predominately over the age of 25,

FOREST HISTORY TODAY \| SPRING/FALL 2004 **51**

they were now overwhelmingly under 25.30 With the mandatory step test,
many Indian firefighters were dropped from their crews. By the
mid-1970s, the number of Indian firefighters significantly declined.
Among the Taos Snowballs, many firefighters---or would-be
firefighters---found employment in the War on Poverty programs. A
worldwide demand for Zuni-made jewelry precip- itated a number of
Zunis to forgo the hazards of firefighting. As permanent job
opportunities increased, firefighting lost its impor- tance as a
wage-earning activity. By 1970, Zuni no longer sup- ported a
firefighting crew. Hopi fire crews declined when tourism became more
profitable than firefighting. Among the Mescalero Apaches, morale
declined, and changing economic conditions and declining interest in
firefighting led to the demise of the Red Hats. While a hundred men
could be assembled at Mescalero on short notice in the 1950s, the Red
Hats ceased to exist by 1973.31 The changing economic scene in the
late sixties and the pas- sage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 led to
additional changes in the Indian firefighting program. In 1973,
largely to comply with the equal employment opportunity standards
mandated by the federal government, women were for the first time
admitted to the ranks of firefighting. The following year, an
all-woman crew was organized on the White Mountain Apache and San
Carlos Apache reservations. Other tribes incorporated women into their
regular crews. Women firefighters are "just as good as men," Walt
Sixkiller, fire management coordinator with the Indian Bureau's
Albuquerque Area Office noted, "and their production is as good."32 As
economic conditions and opportunities deteriorated in Indian Country
in the early 1980s, a number of tribes sought to reactivate their
crews. In 1981, the Jicarilla Apache requested basic fire training
from the Bureau of Indian Affairs for activating a SWFF crew on the
reservation. Two years later, Acoma Pueblo requested assistance in
initiating a crew. Blessed with a decrease in wildland fires in the
west, however, federal agencies were not looking to add crews.
Calendar year 1982 marked the first year in a decade that the
twenty-two SWFF Indian crews were not

assigned to fires outside of Region 3.33

Max Peterson, Chief of the USFS, explained in a 1982 memo to New
Mexico Representative Manual Lujan why additional crews were not being
approved. Additional crews would reduce the number of assignments for
existing crews, Peterson pointed out. If crews averaged fewer than two
assignments per season (between 1970 and 1981, 110 SWFF crews were
sent on 193 assignments, clearly fewer than two per crew), it would
not be worth "the time and expense for either the individual or the
\[US\] Forest Service for testing and training." If additional crews
were needed, Peterson promised, tribes that had traditionally partici-
pated in SWFF would be given preference.34

The diminished demand for crews remained through the first half of the
1980s. Then, in 1985 and continuing until the end of decade, the
Southwest experienced an increased number of destruc- tive forest and
wildland fires that required mobilizing additional fire crews. There
was even a renewed demand for the highly trained and specialized,
labor-intensive Type I hotshot crews. Apache hot- shot crews were
organized on the Mescalero, White Mountain and San Carlos
reservations, with the San Carlos hotshots being an all-woman crew.
Other hotshot crews were organized among the Blackfeet Tribe in
Montana, the Warm Springs Tribes in Oregon and several Alaska Native
tribes.35

**THE LEGACY OF FIRE WARRIORS**

Today more than 6,000 American Indian firefighters continue to battle
forest and wildland fires across the United States. More than 1,600
are SWFF Indian firefighters from the Southwest who represent 78
different crews. The largest contingent of American Indian
firefighters today comes from the Montana Indian Firefighters, who
number more than 3,500.36 Approximately one out of five forest and
wildland firefighters today is an American Indian or Alaska Native.
Firefighting remains a much-needed source of income for Indian
firefighters. Firefighting wages rep- resent approximately one-third
of the income Indian firefighters earn each year, meaning firefighting
remains a big part of employ- ment on the reservations.37

The inherent danger in fighting fires remains today and was epitomized
in the June 1990 Dude Creek fire in central Arizona's Prescott
National Forest, a fire that claimed the lives of six fire- fighters.
James Moore, a member of the Navajo Scouts firefighting crew, recalled
seeing a "tidal wave of fire" come down upon the firefighters. Fellow
Scout Eldon Jones described how the fire seemed to race down on the
firefighters. In addition to the six lives lost, the fire consumed 45
square miles (over 28,000 acres) of Tonto National Forest.

It was a strong work ethic and a fierce pride in a job well done that
led to the organization of American Indian firefighters. Fewer than
two-dozen Mescalero Red Hats joined the ranks of trained firefighters
in 1948. Since then thousands of American Indians have been recruited
and trained to battle fires throughout the United States. In addition
to those *fire warriors* battling forest and wildland fires, hundreds
of other American Indians and Alaska Natives are maintaining important
environmental connections to the land by working in tribal forest
management programs.

The legacy of the Indian fire warriors, while having its gene- sis in
the Southwest, resulted in American Indian crews being organized in
Montana, Alaska, and the Rocky Mountain region. Individual crews were
also organized among the Red Lake Chippewa in Minnesota; the Seminole
of Florida; the Cheyenne, Arapaho, Cherokee, Choctaw and Kiowa nations
of Oklahoma; the Alabama-Coushatta of Texas; the Cherokee of North
Carolina; and the Passamoquoddy Tribe in Maine. The legacy of SWFF
Indian crews today is aptly summed up by Jim Stires, national head of
the Bureau of Indian Affairs branch of fire management based at the
National Interagency Fire Center in Boise, Idaho. "We have some real
high level, sophisticated computer modeling to understand fire
behavior" today, Stires explains. "But if a vet- eran Indian
firefighter told me what a fire was going to do, I'd believe him over
the computers."38 ■

*David H. DeJong is a Ph.D. candidate in American Indian Policy
Studies from the University of Arizona. He has worked as a Project
Coordinator for the Pima-Maricopa Irrigation Project in the Gila River
Indian Community (Arizona) for six years.*

**NOTES**

1.  35 Stat. 783. In 1889, the first national policy affecting tribal
    timber was enacted. The Dead and Down Act (25 Stat. 673) authorized
    the sale of "Dead timber, standing or fallen\...for the sole benefit
    of such Indian or

**52** FOREST HISTORY TODAY \| SPRING/FALL 2004

Indians." In 1908, the Indian Forest Service and the USFS signed a
cooperative agreement with the USFS establishing firewatchers and
forest protection corps on four northern tribal forests. The agreement
was canceled in 1909. Ballinger and Gifford Pinchot, head of the USFS,
differed in forestry goals and over the fact that the USFS had to
include Indian labor in its forestry management program. "United
States Congress, Joint Committee to Investigate Interior Department
and Forestry Service," *Investigation of the Department of Interior
and of the Bureau of Forestry*, Senate Document no. 719, (Washington
DC: Government Printing Office, 61st Congress, 3rd Session, 1911),
1192. Indian foresters were responsible for fire prevention and
suppression on an average area exceeding 80,000 acres, considerably
more than the 50,000 acres for which USFS personnel were responsible.
Alan S. Newell, Richmond L. Clow, and Richard N. Ellis, *A Forest in
Trust:*

*Three-Quarters of a Century of Indian Forestry 1910--1986* (Seattle,
Washington: Historical Research Associates, prepared for the Bureau of
Indian Affairs, Division of Forestry, 1986), 3--4. The Indian Service
lacked resources and expertise largely because of Congressional parsi-
mony and the tenuous nature of the Indian Service, which was fre-
quently the target of elimination. The Indian Service also made
cooperative agreements with the U.S. Department of Agriculture (to run
agricultural research stations), the U.S. Reclamation Service (to
build and operate irrigation projects) and the USFS. The Indian
Service was notorious for attracting less than qualified personnel. In
1909, the Indian Service contracted with the Public Health Service for
a variety of health care services, including medical experts to
operate the Indian health program.

2.  J.P. Kinney, *Indian Forest and Range* (Washington DC: Forestry
    Enterprises, 1950).

3.  Calvin W. Gower, "The CCC Indian Division," *Minnesota History*
    (Spring 1972) 43(1): 9; and J.P. Kinney, "E.C.W. on Indian
    Reservations," *Journal of Forestry* (Washington DC: Society of
    American Foresters, December 1933) 31:8, 911.

4.  Stephen J. Pyne, *Fire in America: A Cultural History of Wildland
    and Rural Fire* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
    1982), 287. *Annual Report of the Secretary of the Interior*
    (Washington DC: Government Printing Office, 1952), 410.

5.  Dorothy Gray Guck, "Apache Red Hats," *New Mexico Magazine*
    (September 1951) 29(9): 47; and Steven Lowell, "Indian Firefighters
    Best, Forest Service Declares," *Arizona Daily Star* (23 August
    1959), A-4. Prior to training the Red Hats, Shields had relied on
    unorganized Indian mill hands and local cowboys to suppress fires.

6.  Dorothy Gray Guck, "Redhats on the Warpath," *Empire Magazine* (copy
    on file at the University of Arizona Native American Research and
    Training Center, Tucson), 13.

7.  Catherine Christopher, "Peace Pipes on the Warpath," *Point West*

( July--August 1961) 3(7): 40.

8.  Guck, "Apache Red Hats," 48. Dorothy Gray Guck, "War Whoops on the
    Fire Line," *American Forests* ( January 1952), 59.

9.  Lowell, "Indian Firefighters Best, Forest Service Declares," 4-A;
    and Christopher, "Peace Pipes on the Warpath," 40.

10. Steven Lowell, "Indian Firefighters Assigned to Worst Forest Blaze
    Tasks," *Arizona Daily Star* (1 January 1954), A-1.

11. Letter from Trinity National Forest, Big Bar, California, October 8,
    1951, on file at the University of Arizona Native American Research
    and Training Center, Tucson. "Surpluses in U.S. are Hailed by
    Nixon," *New York Times* (19 May 1954), L-5.

12. Jennie Joe, "Interview with Zuni Firefighters," Zuni Pueblo, New
    Mexico, (University of Arizona Native American Research and Training
    Center, Tucson) 10 May 1990, 3; Jennie Joe, "Interview with Taos
    Firefighters," Taos Pueblo, New Mexico, 10 May 1990, 2; and "Indians
    Fighting Fire," *New York Times* (31 May 1951), 31.

13. The "I" was dropped in 1953 when Hispanic crews were added to the

program. Clarence K. Collins, "Indian Firefighters of the Southwest,"

*Journal of Forestry* ( January 1962) 60(1): 88.

14. John Clarke Hunt, "The Peaceful Warpath," *American Forests*
    (March 1964) 70(3): 38. The crews came from the Crow, Flathead,
    Northern Cheyenne, Rocky Boy, Fort Belknap, Fort Peck and Fort Hall
    reserva- tions.

15. Joe, "Taos Firefighters," 9.

16. *Indian Forest Management* (Washington DC: Bureau of Indian Affairs,
    Office of Trust and Economic Development, Division of Forestry,
    1987), 2.

17. Lowell, "Indian Firefighters Best"; Dorothy Gray Guck, "Apaches on
    the Warpath", (Capitan, New Mexico: Mesa Ranger Station, n.d.), 7.

18. Collins, "Indian Firefighters of the Southwest," 90; Christopher,
    "Peace Pipes on the Warpath," 40; and Lowell, "Indian Firefighters
    Best."

19. Collins, "Indian Firefighters of the Southwest," 89, notes that SWFF
    Indian crews were also paid more than the unskilled pick-up
    firefight- ers. Fewer crew bosses, fireline supervisors, and
    firefighters were needed when SWFF crews were used, thus lowering
    transportation and food costs.

20. Guck, "Red Hats on the Warpath," 13.

21. Guck, "Apaches on the Warpath," 2. Ceremonial fire was important for
    symbolic and natural effects. The kindling of fire and the process
    of creating fire were also highly ceremonial among American Indians.
    Old fires had to be ceremonially extinguished before a new one could
    be kindled. Among the Hopi, for example, two ceremonies---the
    Greater and Lesser New-Fire ceremonies---were held each year. The
    former was one of the most important ceremonies among the Hopi, with
    its flames regarded with absolute reverence. The Navajo Fire Dance
    is another example of the ceremonial importance of fire. This dance
    was a spectacular all night event concluding the Mountain Topway
    Ceremony and was reserved for the fire god Hastsezini. To kindle
    fire for the ceremony, a fire drill had to be crafted from a cedar
    tree that had been struck by lightning. After the ceremonial
    participants left the site, spectators come forward to pick up
    charred fragments of cedar bark and bathe their hands in the flames
    to ward off "the evil effects of fire." See Jesse Walter Fewkes,
    "The Lesser New-Fire Ceremony at Walpi," *American Anthropologist* (
    July--September 1901) 3(3): 438, 445; Washington Matthews, *The
    Night Chant, a Navaho Ceremony* (New York: AMS Press Inc., reprint,
    1978), 26; Washington Matthews, *The Mountain Chant* (Washington,
    D.C.: Bureau of Ethnology, Smithsonian Institute, 1887), 442. The
    Fire Dance was not uniquely Navajo, as many tribes, including the
    Apaches and Pueblos, had a similar ceremony.

22. Christopher, "Peace Pipes on the Warpath," 54.

23. K.O. Wilson, "Operation Redskin," *Fire Control Notes* ( July 1952)
    13(3):

3\. Guck, "Red Hats on the Warpath," 13. Christopher, "Peace Pipes on the
Warpath," 54, also notes a successful raindance among Zuni fire-
fighters during the 1951 Little Bear Creek fire in Arrowhead,
California. For Zuni firefighters, the mythical Thunderbird, a deity to
which the Zuni pray, serves as the unit namesake. See G.B. Cordova,
"Weekly Report," (USFS Region 3, copy on file at the University of
Arizona Native American Research and Training Center, Tucson, 30 May
1990) 10--11. The Thunderbird is a "father-protector" and is associ-
ated with rain. When "the Thunderbird flaps its wings...it causes thun-
der and brings the rain that aides in extinguishing the fire enemy."

24. Joe, "Interview with Mescalero Apache Firefighters," Mescalero, New
    Mexico, 11 May 1990, 19, and "Taos Firefighters," 11--12. Robert
    Struckman, "Indians play pivotal role in fighting nation's
    wildfires," *The Christian Science Monitor*, 16 May 2001, 2.

25. J.L. Ball, "Angels in Hard Hats," *American Forests* ( January 1972)
    78(1):

13\. Struckman, 2.

26. Cordova, "Weekly Report" 30 May 1990, 4, 6.

27. Hunt, "The Peaceful Warpath," 62. This figure includes all SWFF
    crews, not just SWFF Indian crews. In 1989, SWFF Indian crews from

FOREST HISTORY TODAY \| SPRING/FALL 2004 **53**

Acoma, Jemez, Jicarilla, Laguna, Mescalero, San Felipe, Santa Clara,
Taos, Zia, Zuni, Hopi, Hualapai, Navajo, San Carlos, Tohono O'odham,
White Mountain Apache and Yavapai earned \$6,469,011. *Indian Forest
Management: 1989 Accomplishment Report* (Washington DC: Bureau of
Indian Affairs, 1989).

28. Stephen J. Pyne, *Fire on the Rim* (New York: Weidenfeld and
    Nicolson, 1989), 166. Pyne, *Fire in America*, 100, notes that some
    Indian crews rebelled when they were sent not to fight fires but to
    mend fences in National Park sites.

29. Jim Abbott, "Physical Fitness for Firefighters," *Fire Management
    Notes* (Summer 1975) 36(3): 3. Roger Sylvester, *Fire in the
    Northern Environment*, 251, ed. C.W. Slaughter (Portland, Oregon:
    Pacific Northwest Forest and Range Experiment Station, Forest
    Service, US Department of Agriculture, 1971). The step test was
    actually intro- duced in 1973, but it was not mandatory until 1975.
    It was intended to be a non-discriminatory way of determining a
    firefighter's physical fit- ness and stamina.

30. Younger Indian firefighters were more likely to imbibe alcoholic
    drinks, creating even more difficulties. If a firefighter was
    inebriated, the entire crew could be sent home. Some Zuni crews were
    disbanded due to crewmembers having been "sent home drunk." See Joe,
    "Zuni Firefighters," 19. Hunt, "The Peaceful Warpath," 61, noted "If
    a member becomes intoxicated or even drinks intoxicating liquor
    while on a fire his ID card will be permanently canceled." Personal
    Telephone Interview with Fernando Abeita, Albuquerque Area Fire
    Management Officer, 24 August 1990. Many Indian communities had once
    excluded younger Indian men from firefighting through traditional
    internal controls.

31. C.L. Sonnichsen, *The Mescalero Apache* (Norman: University of
    Oklahoma, 1973), 293.

32. ![](media/image208.png)Mary Vargas Albertson, "Equal Employment
    Opportunity and Affirmative Action in Fire Management," *Fire
    Control Notes* (Winter

1979--1980) 41(1): 3. By 1978, when Congress enacted the Civil Service
Reform Act, all federal agencies that were major employers of fire-
related personnel were mandated to establish a workforce that
reflected the nation's diversity. Personal Telephone Interview with
Walt Sixkiller, Fire Management Coordinator, Albuquerque Area Office,
27 August, 1990.

33. The 22 SWFF Indian crews came from Hopi (2), Navajo (6), San Carlos
    Apache (6), Zuni (3), Jemez (1), Santo Domingo (3), and Taos (1).
    Each was assigned to short engagements in the Southwest during 1982.

34. Memorandum from R. Max Peterson to Representative Manual Lujan,
    January 22, 1982 (copy on file at the University of Arizona Native
    American Research and Training Center, Tucson).

35. Hotshot crews are limited to the amount of funding available and
    fire occurrence. The BIA, however, does not view the creation of
    hotshot crews as one of its fiduciary responsibilities. Regional and
    national lim- its also restrict the number of crews. A hotshot crew
    from the Warm Springs Reservation in Oregon became the second
    self-supporting hot- shot crew in the nation, in 1987, contracting
    for all of its work. See Holly M. Gill, "Warm Springs Hotshots,"
    *Fire Management Notes* (Spring 1989) 50(1): 14. In 1990, the Chief
    Mountain Hotshots (Blackfeet Nation) were organized in Montana. In
    1999, the crew received the dis- tinguished National Safety Award
    for zero time lost to accidents and zero vehicle accidents.
    [http://www.blackfeetnation.com/home%20](http://www.blackfeetnation.com/home)
    Page/chief\_mountain\_hotshots.htm (accessed on 24 February 2004).
    Alaska Native crews come from Chena, Denali, Midnight Sun and
    Tazlina.

36. Jennifer Perez, "Indian fire crews headed east," *Great Falls
    Tribune online*, 14 November 2001.

37. "Indian firefighters contribute their expertise," *CNN.com*, U.S.
    News, 5 September 2000.

38. Struckman, "Indians play pivotal role in fighting nation's
    wildfires," 2.

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | It was a            |                       |
|                       | half-century of     |                       |
|                       | rapid change and    |                       |
|                       | increasing          |                       |
|                       | controversy, marked |                       |
|                       | by words            |                       |
+=======================+=======================+=======================+
|                       | that still clang    |                       |
|                       | with contention:    |                       |
|                       | wilderness, civil   |                       |
|                       | rights, public      |                       |
|                       | participation,      |                       |
|                       | clearcut-           |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | ting, ecosystem     |                       |
|                       | management, spotted |                       |
|                       | owl,                |                       |
|                       | environmentalist,   |                       |
|                       | timber salvage.     |                       |
|                       | Here                |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | the former chiefs   |                       |
|                       | look back at the    |                       |
|                       | issues they faced   |                       |
|                       | during their        |                       |
|                       | administrations and |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | allow us to glimpse |                       |
|                       | the inner workings  |                       |
|                       | of the Forest       |                       |
|                       | Service. Sometimes  |                       |
|                       | caught              |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | unawares by the     |                       |
|                       | forces of change,   |                       |
|                       | sometimes           |                       |
|                       | prescient, by turns |                       |
|                       | humble and defi-    |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | ant but always      |                       |
|                       | candid, the chiefs  |                       |
|                       | reflect on their    |                       |
|                       | efforts to carry    |                       |
|                       | out the agency's    |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | mission in a time   |                       |
|                       | of turbulence.      |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | This book is        |                       |
|                       | essential reading   |                       |
|                       | for environmental   |                       |
|                       | policy analysts,    |                       |
|                       | public              |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | administration      |                       |
|                       | specialists,        |                       |
|                       | federal and state   |                       |
|                       | foresters, natural  |                       |
|                       | resource managers,  |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | and historians of   |                       |
|                       | forestry and the    |                       |
|                       | environmental       |                       |
|                       | movement.           |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| ISBN: PAPER:          | **\$20**            | To order, contact   |
| 0-89030-063-1         |                       | the Forest History  |
|                       |                       | Society at          |
|                       |                       | 919/682-9319,       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| CLOTH: 0-89030-064-X  | **\$29**            | or order online at  |
|                       |                       | [www.foresthistory. |
|                       |                       | org.](http://www.fore |
|                       |                       | sthistory.org/)       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

**54** FOREST HISTORY TODAY \| SPRING/FALL 2004

######## "HOT SHOT" CREWS

Stanley Stevenson

Fire Control Officer, Cleveland National Forest

Scouting revealed that the head of the Burma Fire of 1949, Cleveland
National Forest, was spreading rapidly uphill through medium to heavy
brush and would reach the rim of an adjacent watershed unless checked
on a small ridge ¼ from the top. One "hot shot" crew under Foreman
George McLarty, San Bernardino National Forest, had been working the
northern flank fro the bottom and would reach the top too late to
effect the check. The Cleveland "hot shot" crew Foreman Leon Ballou,
and 4 men were flown via helicopter from the southern flank of the
fire to the ridge at the head of the fire. The 5 men hurriedly cut a
line in front of the fire, back-fired it out and started a direct
attack on the fire edge down the south flank to meet the rest of the
crew. The crew on the northern flank meanwhile had pushed through and
tied to the northern end of the fired out line.

Although numerous spots occurred and the crews lost the south flank
twice because of whirlwinds, they closed the gap and effected control
on a 280-acre fire that would probably have more than tripled its size
within 4 hours unless the check had been made and the lines tied
together.

Since these crews are trained to subsist on the line with bare
essentials, a sustained push taking advantage of lulls in fire
intensity is possible. This was demonstrated by the San Bernardino
"hot shot" crew on the Agua Tibia Fire of 1950.

Lightning started this fire in very steep to precipitous terrain
covered with medium to extremely heavy brush and scrub oak. The west
flank of the fire had slopped over the planned control ridge
approximately ½ mile from the top of the main divide.

Helicopter scouting at 10:30 a.m. revealed that if the slop-over could
be controlled the lines being constructed from the top and bottom
along the flank would probably control that side of the fire.

Foreman McLarty was flown by helicopter around the slop-over and he
then jumped about 6 feet to the ground inside the burn above the
slop-over. He subsequently cleared a landing spot and 4 additional men
were flown in to begin work on the line.

Meanwhile, the rest of the crew were started down the ridge top along
an old trail. Helicopter coverage guided the crew to their destination
where they split forces and started around the slop-over. Although
this action was completed within 1 ½ hours after the initial scouting,
the slop-over had spread to a perimeter of approximately 65 chains on
a very steep rocky slope in medium to heavy brush oak type.

McLarty and his whole crew worked until dark. They were sent food,
lights, and blankets by helicopter. The crew was fed and rested in
relays until a "scratch" line was constructed around the slop-over
about 11:00 p.m. Early the following morning, the crew was again
serviced by helicopter and the fire line finished and mop-up started.

Stubborn aggressiveness on the part of this crew prevented the fire
from crossing the drainage and establishing a new head on even more
precipitous terrain.

These two examples illustrate the flexibility of "hot shot" crew
action. Similar action has been taken many times during the past 4
years. Control possibilities such as these would have been impractical
without well organized, trained, and conditioned crews.

One of the "hot shot" crews has been based during the fire season on
the Cleveland National Forest. The following notes, although concerned
primarily with the Cleveland "hot shot" organization and operational
procedures, are representative for "hot shot" crews in the California
Region.

The crew is composed of young men whose primary requisites are
physical fitness and a will to work. Their lack of experience and
conditioning are compensated by intensive training in fire line
construction and use of hand tools and fire hose lays at the beginning
of each season. These men are termed "fire fighters" and receive
fire-fighter rates of pay while on a fire. When not engaged on fire
suppression they are paid laborer wages and used on forest projects.

A sub-foreman or straw boss works with and has charge of from 5 to 8
fire fighters. The straw boss is an integral part of each crew and
takes his days off at the same time as the crew. Two assistant foremen
acts as crew bosses and are each assigned one-half the straw boss
squads. One of the crew bosses is capable of assuming temporary charge
of the whole crew during the absence of the foreman.

The crew is under the direct supervision of an experienced fire
fighter who can act, as one foreman put it, "from general to father
confessor." This foreman must be a skilled leader, fire-wise, and
physically fit for very arduous work. He usually assumes the duties of
sector boss on fires.

Crew members are hired only after full understanding and acceptance of
the rigid rules set up. Camp routine is fashioned after that of
athletic training camps with scheduled hours for meals, work,
recreation and sleep. Although some men quickly drop out of the crew
because of the difficulty of the job and the rigid discipline, three
have returned each year since 1947 and ten others including the
foreman have been on the crew for the past 2 seasons.

Conservation, wildlife, general forestry, and training films give the
reasons for the "why" and "how" of forest fire protection. The crew is
given instruction in the use and care of fire line hand tools,
followed by intensive work-outs on practice fire lines.

Several afternoons during the first part of the season are spent on
illustrative lectures, orientation, fire behavior, safety, and correct
fire line construction practices. Action on early season fires is
discussed on the ground with a large part of the constructive comment
coming from the crew members.

After several successful attacks on early season fires, crews begin to
develop an esprit de corps and an eagerness to prove their ability.
Several distinctive arm patches have been designed and worn by crews
hailing their identity. The competitive spirit on large fires
requiring more than one crew has provided additional incentive toward
better production.

The following summary of work accomplishment, although reflecting
considerable more suppression time during the heavier fire season of
1950, indicates the advisability of preplanning and budgeting forces
primarily for fire suppression.

Cleveland crew activities: *Percent of total man-hours payrolled*

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | **1949**            | **1950**              |
+=======================+=======================+=======================+
| Training            | 12.6                | 6.6                 |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Project             | 10.7                | 17.1                  |
| work(nonfire)       |                       |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Fire Suppression    | 48.6                | 62.6                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Headquarters camp   |                       |                       |
| maintenance and     |                       |                       |
| operation,          |                       |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Cooks, and annual   | [28.1]{.underline}  | [13.7]{.underline}    |
| leave               |                       |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | 100                 | 100                   |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

A sample of fire line construction rates by direct attacks on fire
perimeters in Southern California vegetative types, computed from the
data recorded on the ground by the Cleveland crew foreman and
including rest periods, lunch time, and delays due to lost line, is
given in table 1. Comparable line construction rates are difficult to
evaluate since the "hot shot" crews are generally placed on lines
where untrained or unorganized crews would make very little if any
progress.

TABLE 1. -- *A sample of fire line construction rates by the "hot
shot" crew,*

*Cleveland National Forest*

+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Cove | Cond | Time | Char | Slop | Men  | **Fi | **Bu |
| r      | ition  |        | acter  | e      |        | re     | ilt**  |
| Type | of   |        | of   |        |        | Line |      |
|        | Crew |        | Fire |        |        | **     | Aver |
|        |        |        | edge |        |        |      | age    |
|        |        |        |        |        |        | Tota | per  |
|        |        |        |        |        |        | l      | man- |
|        |        |        |        |        |        |        | hour   |
+========+========+========+========+========+========+========+========+
| Medi | Fres | Day  | Hot  | Mode | Numb | Chai | Chai |
| um     | h      | &    |        | rate[^ | er     | ns     | ns     |
| to   |        | Nigh |        | 1^](#_ | 23   | 74   | 0.21 |
| heav |        | t      |        | bookma |        |        |        |
| y      |        |        |        | rk5)   |        |        |        |
| brus |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| h      |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Cham | Do.  | Day  | Do.  | Stee | 26   | 135  | .86  |
| ise    |        |        |        | p      |        |        |        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Medi | Do.  | Nigh | Do.  | Do.  | 28   | 40   | .35  |
| um     |        | t      |        |        |        |        |        |
| brus |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| h      |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Heav | Do.  | Do.  | Mod. | Mode | 20   | 13   | .23  |
| y      |        |        | Hot  | rate[^ |        |        |        |
| Brus |        |        |        | 2^](#_ |        |        |        |
| h      |        |        |        | bookma |        |        |        |
|        |        |        |        | rk6)   |        |        |        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Cham | Tire | Do.  | Do.  | Stee | 12   | 41   | .34  |
| ise    | d      |        |        | p[^3^] |        |        |        |
|        |        |        |        | (#_boo |        |        |        |
|        |        |        |        | kmark7 |        |        |        |
|        |        |        |        | )      |        |        |        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Cham | Fres | Day  | Hot[ | Do.  | 38   | 23   | .30  |
| ise    | h      |        | ^4^](# |        |        |        |        |
| &    |        |        | _bookm |        |        |        |        |
| Brus |        |        | ark8)  |        |        |        |        |
| h      |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Medi | Very | Nigh | Do.  | Do.  | 42   | 65   | .25  |
| um     | tire | t      |        |        |        |        |        |
| to   | d      |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| heav |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| y      |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
|      |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| brus |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| h      |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+

[]{#_bookmark5 .anchor}^1^ Scattered scrub oak stems

[]{#_bookmark6 .anchor}^2^ Very Steep ½ mile hike to line

[]{#_bookmark7 .anchor}^3^ Some mop-up, rocks, cliffs

[]{#_bookmark8 .anchor}^4^ Line abandoned two time because of
flare-ups

The value of a trained unit of men that can be sent into difficult
sections of a fire perimeter with a high degree of certainty that
control will be effected, has been demonstrated many times during the
past. The ever increasing demand for "hot shots" when the going gets
rough is the fire manager's endorsement of the "hot shot" program.

**The Interregional Fire Suppression Crew**

![](media/image209.png)

***Martin E. Alexander***

**From [Fire Management]{.underline}, Summer 1974 issue**

The wildfire problem is of major concern to all western forest
resource management agencies and organizations. During the average
year, some 12,000 wildfires blacken 200 thousand acres of the 210
million protected acres of the National Forest System. One of the
longtime objectives of the U.S Forest Service has been to provide
highly trained, well conditioned, versatile fire suppression crews to
critical fire situations. A fire suppression crew with high mobility
that can reach a large project fire on short notice and do an
effective job during the first burning period, has always been the
dream of fire control managers. The Interregional Fire Sup-

pression Crews developed by the U.S. Forest Service serve this
purpose.

**Background and History**

For many years, forest protection agencies relied on pick-up
firefighters that were hired on an \"as needed\" basis. Men for these
crews came from every walk of life; from skid row bums to short order
cooks. In most cases these men had very little fire suppression
training or experience. It was not until the advent of the Civilian
Conservation Corps (CCC) in the 1930\'s and early 40\'s that any
semblance of organized fire suppression crews was achieved (1). The
CCC crews were used primarily for

conservation projects such as trail and campground construction, but
doubled as a firefighting force.

The first organized U.S Forest Service fire suppression crew was the
\"40-man\" crew established in 1939 on an experimental basis (2). The
40-Man crew was located on the Siskiyou National Forest in
southwestern Oregon. The crew was very effective in fire suppression
in the Region 6 National Forests. The Oregon \"Red Hats,\"
co-sponsored by the School of Forestry at Oregon State College and
various State agencies in 1940, was organized along the same lines as
the 40-Man crew (4). During the

**[Fire Management]{.underline} Summer 1974**

Page 1 of 7

war years programs like these were largely discontinued. However, some
of the principles of training, organization, and use were to be later
adopted by other U.S. Forest Service fire suppression crews.

In 1947, Region 5 of the U.S. Forest Service began to organize \"Hot
Shot\" crews for use in California (5). They were well trained, fast
and hard hitting handline crews. Such crews as the El Cariso
(Cleveland National Forest) and Del Rosa (San Bernardino National
Forest) Hot Shots proved themselves more than once under difficult
conditions in the brush fields of southern California.

During the 1950\'s most of the western U.S. Forest Service regions
maintained large brushcrews to do slash disposal and other timber sale
work. There were also several hundred blister rust control crewmen
organized into 25-man fire suppression crews in regions with blister
rust infested stands. These crews provided trained manpower for use on
large project fires. \"The Redmond Raiders,\" a TSI crew stationed on
the Deschutes National Forest, was a good example. Because of
transportation problems in dispatching these crews to other areas of
the West, their most common use was local. With the termination of the
blister rust program and the transition to bulldozer slash piling,
such project crews were no longer available.

In the late 50\'s, fire control personnel in Washington, D.C. felt
fire suppression crews could be used more efficiently if men were
stationed near an airport. It was felt that a large airplane
immediately available to transport men was necessary to

carry out the concept of quick mobilization and dispatching. Such a
plan became a reality when 5 IRFS crews were organized for the 1961
fire season (3). The first IRFS crews were located in the far West and
Northwest. By 1963, the number of IRFS crews increased to 9. Through
the years their value in fire suppression became quite apparent and
allowed for an expansion of the IRFS crew program. In 1970, 15 IRFS
crews were available for summer fire season. At present there are 19
IRFS crews stationed in the western U.S. during the summer

fire season (table 1).

**Recruitment and Organization** Men for IRFS crews are recruited
predominantly from the western U.S. Most often they are college
students majoring in some phase of forestry. The Forest assigned an
IRFS crew is responsible for screening, recruiting, and hiring crewmen
and overhead. Crew members must be at least 18 and preferably not over
45, with the average age being 21. They must pass a yearly physical
examination, be willing to fly, and be away from home base for
extended periods of time. Employment is from about mid-June to early
September. Some IRFS crews, specifically the Region 5 crews, terminate
in November. Most IRFS crews have experienced fire fighters- 65 to 95
percent are former crew members.

The crew headquarters have been strategically placed. Ideally they are
located near large airports, which permits rapid transport by aircraft
to going wildfires and high fire-danger areas. Crew members are housed
in some sort of barracks, varying from reconditioned garages to

**The Interregional Fire Suppression Crew**

elaborate college-type dor- mitories.

An IRFS crew is normally composed of 25 men, consisting of a foreman,
assistant crew foreman (who may or may not be one of the squad
bosses), 3 squad bosses, and 20- to 21- crew members. Overhead
positions on IRFS crews are usually based on past fire experience,
training, and crew seniority. The IRFS crew foreman is responsible for
supervision of the crew, both on fire assignments and at home base.
Crew size and structure vary among the regions, depending upon the
objectives and the needs of the home region.

Movement and use of these crews within their own regions is
coordinated by the regional fire dispatchers. Requests for IRFS crews
from other regions are coordinated through the Boise Interagency Fire
Center (BIFC) at Boise, Idaho. BIFC arranges for air transportation
and maintains a national listing of available IRFS crews (6). BIFC
provides logistic support rather than serving as a command center.
This permits a central office, which has fire suppression crew
requests coming from all over the West, to analyze and estimate
potential situations and assign priorities when the demand for IRFS
crews is greater than the supply.

**Training**

Crew members usually receive 2 weeks of both formal classroom
instruction and field training. Training is given in various facets of
the fire suppression job. Training is intensive because without it
crewmen would be no better than pick-up firefighters.

Classroom training consists of films, lectures, and programmed
instruction texts in Forest Service organization. This includes fire
and crew organization, fire behavior and weather, the 10 Standard
Fire- fighting Orders, safety, first aid, retardant and aircraft
manage- ment, radio communications, fire suppression principles for
both small and large fires, fire control attack methods, woodsmanship,
and thinking and reasoning during emergency stress conditions. Field
demonstrations are given in various fireline construction methods
(progressive, one-lick, etc.), care and use of hand tools, and
specialized equipment such as chain saws, portable and slip-on pumps,
and drip torches.

Physical conditioning is stressed during the 2-week training period.
It consists of calisthen- ics, hikes, obstacle courses, and outdoor
sports. Refresher training and conditioning are continued as needed.

IRFS crews are often faced with long working hours, little food, high
air temperatures, and low humidities, all of which take their toll on
crew members. Another fatigue factor is the required traveling from
one fire to another. It\'s not uncommon to find IRFS crews that have
been away from home base for 2 or 3 weeks during a busy fire season.
But despite the hazards and hardships, the safety record among IRFS
crews is extremely good.

When not actively engaged in training or suppression, the crew
performs district project work such as hazard reduction, maintenance
and construction jobs, fire proofing heavy use areas, slash disposal,
timber stand improvement, trail building, and reconditioning

firefighting tools and equipment. These activities keep crew members
in shape and provide a ready work force for priority district work.
The IRFS crews are on a 24-hour alert, 7 days a week. A sign-out
roster system is utilized by most crews to determine where individual
crew members may be reached at any particular time during off-duty
hours.

**Philosophy and Crew Morale** The effectiveness of any fire
management organization is no greater than the morale of its
personnel. Recognition of this has fostered a high degree of *esprit
de corps* among IRFS crews that consider themselves the \"best.\" It
is customary to assign the IRFS crews control of the most difficult
sectors of project fires. Crew morale appears to soar the hotter the
fireline gets.

IRFS crew members develop nicknames as the result of incidents,
individual character- istics, or backgrounds. Good- natured kidding
among fellow crew members prevails constantly. Several IRFS crews have
developed shoulder patches exemplifying their crew name or locality.

Crew morale is a necessary component of an IRFS crew. Only through a
sense of personal satisfaction and pride can the individuals obtain
the desire required for successful action in difficult fire
situations.

**Mobilization**

The primary purpose of IRFS crews is to provide highly trained and
well-equipped re- inforcement crews for large fire suppression. All 19
IRFS crews are air-mobile and can be moved to any location in the
western

U.S. in 6 to 8 hours after being dispatched. Thus, approximately

**The Interregional Fire Suppression Crew**

420 highly trained men can be mobilized very quickly for any large
project fire or lightning bust.

In one instance, 12 of the 15 IRFS crews were used in the 4,000 acre
Pumpkin Creek fire on the Bighorn National Forest in 1970. IRFS crews
are used in different types of wildland fuels, burning conditions and
terrain - from mopup in heavy West Coast fuels to punching line in
southern California\'s Class 14 brush type.

IRFS crews are used for both day and night duty. They are sometimes
used as an initial attack force on their home forest and by nearby
cooperating agencies and organizations. In such cases they will travel
to a fire utilizing their own crew vehicles. At certain times and
because of individual exper- ience, the crew may be split up and used
as smokechasers during a large lightning bust. Individual crew members
can also be utilized as \"straw\" bosses for pick-up and district
crews. Besides serving as handline crew, they also fill in on fire
control specialty jobs such as helitack crewmen and managers,
retardant mixmasters, and tank truck operators.

Although IRFS crews are used primarily by the U.S. Forest Service in
all of the western regions, 2 unusual fire assign- ments for IRFS
crews were the Russian River fire and the Chaldron fire. The first
occurred in 1969 when 4 IRFS crews from Region I were used on the
Russian River fire on the Chugach National Forest in Alaska upon
personal written communication from Philip W. Gum, R-10, Div. of Fire
Mgmt. and Air Operations. The second occurred during the 1973 fire
season when three Region I

crews and one Region 2 crew were used on the Chadron fire on the
Nebraska National Forest.

The eastern and southern U.S. Forest Service regions have never used
IRFS crews, nor do they anticipate using them because of readily
available manpower, generally small and short duration fires, and
because their fire season does not coincide with IRFS crew employment
periods (personal written communications from Wayne E. Ruziska, R-8,
Div. of Fire Mgmt. and Monroe E. Kimsey, R-9, Div. of Fire and Air
Mgmt.). Therefore, although IRFS crews are available to the eastern
and southern states, it would require extreme --fire danger over a
large area for an extended period of time to warrant dispatch.

The IRFS crews are also used by other federal agencies such as the
Bureau of Land Manage- ment, National Park Service, and the Bureau of
Indian Affairs. They are also called upon for fire suppression by
western state forest resource management agencies, private forest
industry, and timber protection associations.

When the regular fire season is finished in the crew\'s headquarters
area, a crew may be moved to some other part of the West if needed.
This type of arrangement usually consists of a 30- or 45-day detail.
The

Bighorn IRFS crew was used in this manner during the 1972 fire season
in California (1). The Lolo and Pike IRFS crews were also assigned to
the Lassen and Los Padres National Forests, respectively. Such an
arrange- ment not only provides the Forest with an extra fire
suppression force, but allows crew members to gain more varied
experience and see different parts of the country. Similar
arrangements include stand-by duty at fire co- ordination centers
during periods of extreme fire danger.

An extremely valuable asset of IRFS crews is that they arrive at a
fire as a complete \"package\" outfit-they have their own overhead,
chain saws, crew radio communication system, and hand tools (if
ordered with crew). Crew members carry their own fire pack which
includes a sleeping bag, personal gear, and fire suppression clothing
and equipment. The requesting fire control agency has only to provide
food and water.

**IRFS Experience Important** Experience and training on IRFS crews is
sometimes used as criteria for selection of smoke- jumpers. Because of
the wide variety of fire management experience gained on these crews,
crew members should be well qualified to pursue careers as fire
control technicians or professional wildland fire man-

**The Interregional Fire Suppression Crew**

agers, depending upon their education. Many fire control personnel
have worked their way up through the ranks from seasonal fire control
jobs such as lookouts, fire guards, fire prevention patrolmen or as
IRFS crewmen. The experience gained on an IRFS crew not only allows
young men to gain district fire control fundamentals but also allows
them to experience all phases of large fire suppression. This exper-
ience is necessary to all persons pursuing a career in wildland fire
management.

The development of the Interregional Fire Suppression Crews by the
U.S. Forest Service marks a major milestone in wildland fire
suppression. Philip V. Cloward, fire staff officer on the Sawtooth
National Forest, once said that \"what the smokejumper is to small
fires, the IRFS crew is to large fires.\" Performance to date
indicates that the IRFS crews are meeting their objectives and giving
fire management agencies a new dimension in wildland fire sup-
pression not previously avail- able.

*Martin E. Alexander is a forestry technician, Moose Creek Ranger,
Nezperce National Forest, Grangeville, Idaho. He served as a crew
member of the Bighorn National Forest IRFS Crew during the 1972 and
1973 summer fire seasons.*

**The Interregional Fire Suppression Crew**

![](media/image210.png){width="4.515877077865267in" height="4.2525in"}

**Literature Cited**

1.  Anderson, Rolfe E., Boyd L. Ras-mussen, and Verne V. Church.

1941\. Adapting advanced principles of organization and fire-line
construction to CCC suppression crews. Fire Contr. Notes 5(3): 123-218.

2.  Cliff, Edward P., and Rolfe E. Anderson.

1940\. The 40-Man crew-A report on the activities of the experimental
4-Man fire suppression crew. FireContr. Notes 4(2): 47-62.

3.  Division of Fire Control. U.S. Forest Service

1963\. The interregional suppression crew. Fire Contr. Notes 24(4): 93.

4.  Schroeder, George H.

1941\. Oregon\'s \"Red Hats.\" Fire Contr. Notes 5(3): 129-130.

5.  Stevenson, Stanley.

1951\. \"Hot Shot\" crews. Fire Contr. Notes 12(2): 29-31.

6.  U.S. Dept. of Agriculture. Forest Service,

1971\. Interregional Crews. USDA For. Serv. Handb. FSH.5131.41a.

**The Interregional Fire Suppression Crew**

![](media/image211.png)

**The Interregional Fire Suppression Crew**

**Table 1. -- National Forests assigned IRFS crews by U.S. Forest
Service regions with year of crew organization and crew name**

+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| **U.S.F.S.**  | **National    | **Year of     | **Crew Name** |
|               | Forest        | Crew          |                 |
| **Region**    | Assigned IRFS | Organization* |                 |
|                 | Crew(s)**     | *               |                 |
+=================+=================+=================+=================+
| Region 1        | Bitterroot    | 1963          | Bitterroot    |
|                 |                 |                 | I.R.          |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Flathead      | 1966          | Flathead I.R. |
|                 |               |                 |                 |
|                 | Idaho         |                 |                 |
|                 | Panhandle^1^  |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | at Wallace    | 1967          | Coeur D'Alene |
|                 |                 |                 | Hotshots      |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | at Priest     | 1967          | Kaniksu       |
|                 | Lake          |                 | Hotshots      |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | at St. Maries | 1967          | St. Joe       |
|                 |                 |                 | Hotshots      |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Lolo          | 1961          | Lolo I.R.     |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Nezperce      | 1962          | Slate Creek   |
|                 |                 |                 | Hotshots      |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Region 2        | Bighorn       | 1967          | Gibhorn I.R.  |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Pike^2^       | 1962          | Pike I.R.     |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Region 3        | Gila          | 1970          | Gila I.R.     |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Region 4        | Payette       | 1961          | Payette I.R.  |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Sawtooth      | 1967          | Sawtooth I.R. |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Region 5        | Cleveland     | 1961          | El Cariso     |
|                 |                 |                 | Hotshots      |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | San Bernadino | 1961          | Del Rosa      |
|                 |                 |                 | Hotshots      |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Shasta-Trinit | 1967          | Redding       |
|                 | y               |                 | Hotshots      |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Region 6        | Deschutes     | 1962          | Deschutes     |
|                 |                 |                 | I.R.          |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Rogue River   | 1963          | Rogue River   |
|                 |                 |                 | Roughriders   |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Wallow-Whitma | 1967          | Wallow-Whitma |
|                 | n               |                 | n               |
|                 |                 |                 | I.R.          |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Wenatchee     | 1966          | Wenatchee     |
|                 |                 |                 | Bushmen       |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

^1^ In 1974, the IRFS crews stationed on the Coeur D'Alene, Kaniksu,
and St. Joe National Forests were reorganized into the Idaho Panhandle
National Forest (personal written communication from William R. Moore,
R-1, Division of Fire Management).

^2^ Orginally the crew was assigned to the Roosevelt national Forest
but was reassigned in 1969 to the Pike National Forest (personal
communication with Glen C. Scott, former Pike IRFS Crew Foreman).

######## OREGON'S "RED HATS"

GEORGE H. SCHROEDER

*Assistant Professor of Forestry, Oregon State College*

The constant and prompt availability of "snap" crews is most important
in the use of a crew like the Red Hats. The author's description of a
cooperative approach to the problem indicates how the 40-man crew
principle may be adapted to varying administrative conditions.

During the summer of 1940 the school of Forestry at Oregon State
College instituted a program for organization and training of forest
fire-suppression crews. Cosponsors included the National Youth
Administration, States Forester, United States Forest Service, Oregon
Forest Fire Association, and others vitally interested in the
protection of Oregon's forest wealth. The objectives of the program
were:

1.  Furnishing the State of Oregon with an efficient fire organization
    for call in handling emergency fire situations.

2.  Training of forest-fire overhead

3.  Furthering the forestry education of participants.

4.  Providing deserving students with a means of earning money for
    school attendance.

Based at a comp on the McDonald State Forest 7 miles from the Forestry
School in Corvallis, the crews participated in a unique training
program. Two hours of study, 2 hours of training, and 4 hours of hard
work on approved N.Y.A. projects constituted the day's schedule. Study
included a wide range of practical forestry subjects such as first
aid, use of the compass, tree and shrub identification, knot tying,
and life saving. Among other things training consisted of and long
hard hikes over the rough topography of McDonald Forest. Among the
work projects were the following: Road and trail construction, road
and trail maintenance, thinning of forest stands, pruning of forest
stands, soil erosion control, white pine blister rust control, and
snag felling.

During recreation hours some of the men went swimming in the nearby
lake, others played games or passed the time by reading the material
furnished by parents and well-wishers. Leave from camp was allowed,
but not more than 10 percent of the camp strength was granted leave at
any one time. Those who were fortunate enough to be on leave went
skating at the nearby roller rink or enjoyed a show in town.

Having advertised themselves as ready to report to a forest fire at a
moment's notice, the Red Hats were necessarily very highly organized.
The basic unit was a squad of 4 men and a straw boss. One of the straw
bosses in each group of 10 was the ranking officer, and a foreman was
assigned to each crew of 25. Equipped with pick-ups, trucks, and three
25-man busses the camp had ample transportation. Hand tools and mess
equipment were packed ready to go at any time. When a fire call came
in, the supervisor designated the responsible officer; drivers slipped
behind the wheels of the trucks; men who had practiced the procedure
beforehand slid tool caches into pick-ups; straw bosses checked off
their squads; bed rolls were stacked in the rear end of busses and the
men loaded in, caulked boots in hand.

On the fire line the crews worked as originally organized or expanded
by absorbing civilian fire fighters into their squads. On at least two
large fires assistant foremen were detached from their squads and
given civilian crews to supervise. Orders were that an assistant be
trained for all overhead positions so that supervision would always be
available. Since the training program provided timekeepers, torch men
truck drivers, cooks, scouts, and other workmen, members of the crews
were often used to facilitate the handling of pick-up labor assigned
to him. If such substitution was impractical, however, the crew
proceeded with control of operations as best it could.

The Red Hat crews were trained in the progressive method of fire-line
construction. They did not, however, confine themselves to this
operation alone, but burned out their line and mopped-up the area
after backfiring operations. Then men were assigned positions because
of aptitude shown in training and practiced the duties of those
positions in order that the need for supervision in emergency
situations might be minimized.

While on fire-suppression detail the men were paid a minimum of 40
cents an hour plus their expenses, the overhead jobs paying more
according to their importance. Agreement on the wage scale was reached
with the forest-protective agencies in the area before the fire
season. The agencies all seemed pleased with the results and their
average daily earnings of \$5.48 also proved satisfactory to the fire
fighters.

While participating in the base camp training and N.Y.A. work program,
the men were only allowed \$1 per day, but since this amount covered
expenses, it did make it possible to train and organize the crews in
readiness for fire duty. The resulting total average earning (fire
fighting and N.Y.A.) was \$120 per man above expenses for an average
enrollment period of 52.71 days. In addition, 24 men were placed in
summer jobs with the forest-protective agencies. The average income
per man on these positions was approximately \$100 a month plus
expenses.

The program enrolled a total of 113 men. The largest number enrolled
at one time was 87. Three 26-man crews were active during the peak of
fire season, and 2 such crews were available for practically the
entire 4 months (June 1 to October 1).

The camp was initiated for the benefit of first-year students in
forestry who were unable to obtain other employment. Because of an
abundance of summer jobs last year, all except a small number of the
foresters were placed in positions before the fire season opened, and
the camp was thrown open, therefore, to any young man in need of
employment who was physically fit and wished training in the forestry
field. Men were enrolled from almost all of the institutions of higher
education in Oregon. College men from at least six other States took
part and older high-school students proved very good material.

Popularity for the training program is indicated by the fact that,
although plans for the summer of 1941 are at this time very
incomplete, applications are already on hand from several States
showing the interest of young men who have heard of the organ- ization
but did not take part in 1940. With a strong force of veterans
returning and with the probability of a guarantee of minimum earnings
in prospect, it would seem that Oregon's Red Hats have proved their
value and established the program as a permanent institution.

######## THE 40-MAN CREW- A REPORT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE EXPERIMENTAL 40-MAN FIRE SUPPRESSION CREW

EDWARD P. CLIFF

*Supervisor, Siskiyou National Forest, Region 6, U.S Forest Service*

and

ROLFE E. ANDERSON

*Leader of the 40-Man Crew, Region 6, U.S Forest Service*

Region 6, throughout the summer season of 1939, conducted an
experiment in organizing and operating a special 40-man suppression
crew. With regard to this venture in an important field, Regional
Forester Lyle F. Watts in his letter of January 09 states:

"The past season's experience has been valuable. All forests are
enthusiastic about well organized, trained, and properly equipped
mobile crews. Special instructions have been prepared for forests, so
they can organize such crews from their own resources. The region is
going to spend several thousand dollars for light beds and special
equipment. Special overhead training is going to be handled as a
project. New ideas in organizing and managing crews on the fire line
are being developed and tried out. Reducing overhead costs,
particularly behind the line, is almost daily talk on many forests.
Costs on walking men to and from camps have been analyzed and
discussed. The impetus to these and many other matters has, it is
believed, been brought about in part, at least, by the sued of the
40-man crew.

If total expenditures for the 40-man crew, exclusive of the road and
bridge construction, is prorated to each mile of fire line
constructed, it cost \$871 per mile. Long distance transportation,
camp construction, etc., are all included. If only fire equipment,
training, transportation, and suppression costs are included, the crew
constructed each mile of fire line for \$325. By comparison, it cost
an average of \$1,991 to construct and wok each mile of 229 miles of
fire-line on six of our largest fires. If one-third of this was
expended for mop-up and thus eliminated, the 40-man crew constructed
line 35 percent cheaper, if all its costs are included, as compared to
ordinary crews. Such a rough comparison does not tell the whole story
as the 40-man crew in every case worked on the most inaccessible and
difficult sections on fires, and time and expense of transportation
were usually high because of long distances traveled."

Mr. Watts' letter transmitted the comprehensive illustrated and
charted report on the project. In addition to this detailed report,
Messrs. Cliff and Anderson have prepared for publication in Fire
Control Notes a most interesting condensed version.

Fire control men have realized for several years that the practice of
recruiting untrained fire fighters for the suppression of large fires
has proved inefficient and expensive. The 40-man fire suppression crew
was organized in an effort to overcome apparent weaknesses in this
important phase of forest management. Plans originating in Region 6
and the Washington office called for the organization, on an
experimental basis, of a carefully selected, highly trained 40-man
fire suppression crew equipped to sustain themselves for periods of at
least 3 days in inaccessible back country where the work of ordinary
crews is inefficient. Each member of this crew was to be selected for
his physical prowess and woodsman ship, hardened by work, and trained
to use the correct technique in handling each foot of fire line
without detailed supervision.

The Redwood Ranger Station on the Siskiyou National Forest was
selected as the best location for the crew. This station was on the
areas along the coast and Pacific highways, and forests east of the
Cascade Range. In addition, this headquarters site was in the
immediate proximity of needed project work, which would help finance
the crew, and was located on a forest with large inaccessible areas
and difficult fire problems.

**Preparation and Training**

**Recruiting.-** A junior forester with 10 seasons' experience in
supervisory work on fires was chosen as leader. In an effort to choose
qualified men for the crew in a limited time, the regional office
requested each forest to submit the names of several qualified
candidates. The crew members were selected from these candidates by
the leader immediately after his assignment to the job. Most of the
crew members reported for duty between June 16 and July 1, and the
crew reached full strength by July 9. Eight additional men were
recruited throughout the ensuing season to replace men found to be
unqualified because of poor health, poor workmanship, and other
deficiencies. Four squad bosses were selected who were well qualified
in the instruction and management of small crews on fires, in camp,
and on work projects. In picking other members of the crew, men were
selected who were not only capable fire fighter, but who also had
specialties in other line of work. The crew included 2 qualified
first-aid men, 2 "cat skinners," one grader man, 10 fallers, and 3 men
capable of doing fire line cooking. A professional cook and 2 flunkies
were hired to prepare all meals for the crew while in camp. The leader
and squad bosses were included as part of the total crew of 40 men.

The kitchen force was in addition to the regular to the regular 40 men
of the crew. Since the work of this crew was largely experimental in
nature, a special recorder was added to insure obtaining necessary
detailed records of the activities and accomplishments of the crew.

**Salaries and Civil Service Status.-** Members of the crew were hired
as guards (CU-4) pending certification of eligibles, at an entrance
salary of \$110 per month. The squad bosses were given a CU-5 rating,
with a salary of \$125 per month. When away from Grants Pass. The crew
members were supplied board and lodging by the Government.

**Camp Site and Quarters.-** A camp site was selected one-fourth mile
from Redwood Ranger Station on the bank of Illinois River. Eleven
tents set up on the tent frames provided comfortable living quarters
for the crew. Two portable wooden buildings were constructed fir use
as a mess hall and bathhouse. A third portable building, loaned by the
Siskiyou National Forest, was erected for use as a study hall,
conference room, and office quarters.

Water was distributed to all parts of the camp by a pipe line tapping
the ranger water system. Electricity for camp lighting was purchased
from a commercial power distributor. A grounded telephone line, 800
feet of road, and a 20-foot bridge were constructed by the crew to
provide communication and access to the camp.

A number of recreational facilities were provided to occupy the
leisure time of the men closely confined to camp. A gravel dam was
thrown up across the river to form a small lake for swimming. A
soft-ball diamond and volleyball and horseshoe courts were cleared and
leveled for the enjoyment and conditioning of the men.

The cost of constructing and maintaining the camp and supplying fuel
amounted to \$6,245, which includes the value of the time devoted by
the 40-man crews to these activities.

**Equipment and Supplies.-** The objective in equipping the 40-man
crew was to select tools, bedding, and rations which would convert the
crew into an effective fire- fighting unit, self-sustained for a
minimum period of 72 hours, and which at the same time could be
carried over trails and rough country at a creditable speed without
unduly tiring the men. This objective was met by building up packs
which included essential fire tools, concentrated rations consisting
mainly of dehydrated food, and lightweight, goose- down sleeping bags
which rolled into bundles 13 inches long and 7 inches in diameter.

These compact bags, well tailored, with zipper on both inner bag and
cover, proved sufficiently warm for summer use.

Table 1 shows the content and weight of an average pack with essential
equipment. The complete list of fire tools carried to and used on all
fires upon which the 40-man crew took action is shown in table 2.

![](media/image212.jpeg){width="3.288620953630796in"
height="2.693332239720035in"}

Contents of 40-man pack

TABLE 1.- *Contents of an average 40-man crew pack*

+----------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| Number | Item                                    | Weight in pounds |
+==========+===========================================+====================+
| 1      | Pack board, Trapper Nelson              | 5 ½              |
+----------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 1      | Headlight with 3 extra batteries        | 1 ½              |
+----------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 1      | Canteen with water (to hang on belt)    | 2 ½              |
+----------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 1      | Sleeping bag, light weight              | 5 ½              |
+----------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 2      | Lunches in cloth sack (to hang on belt) | 1 ½              |
+----------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 1      | Rations, 3 days                         | 11               |
+----------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|          | Cook and mess outfit or extra equipment | 2                |
+----------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|          | Personal effects                        | 2                |
+----------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|          | Tool, fire (average weight)             | 4                |
+----------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|          | Average weight per man, total           | 35 ½             |
+----------+-------------------------------------------+--------------------+

TABLE 2.- *Fire tools carried to and used on fires by the 40-man crew*

+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| Number | Item                                        | Weight in pounds |
|          |                                               |                  |
|          |                                               | (each)           |
+==========+===============================================+====================+
| 4      | Axes, cruisers                              | 2 ½              |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 6      | Axes, swamping                              | 3 ½              |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 10     | Pulaskis                                    | 3 ½              |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 10     | Hoes, hazel                                 | 3 ½              |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 10     | Shovels, baby (6 carried by last 6 hoe men) | 2                |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 12     | Fusees (for burning out)                    | ½                |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 2      | Saws, falling, with handles                 | 10               |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 1      | Back-pack bag, with pump                    | 6 ½              |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 4      | Axes, falling                               | 4                |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 2      | Oil cans, 1-pint                            | 1                |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 4      | Wedges, wooden                              | ½                |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 10     | Axestones, carborundum                      | ½                |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 10     | Files, 10-inch                              | ½                |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 4      | Bags, water, 2 ½-gallon                     | ½                |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 1      | Bags, water, 5- gallon                      | 1                |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+--------------------+

Surplus saws, axes, steel wedges, sledges, hoes, and shovels were
always carried on the fire tuck for use in case the regular tools were
not sufficient. During the season no use was made of this extra
equipment except in the exchange of dull tools for sharp ones.

Equipment used by this crew and found to be especially adaptable
included hardwood wedges which can be driven with the side of an ax,
and fusees for backfiring. Fusees were particularly adaptable for this
crew because of their lightweight, which made it possible to carry
enough to enable several men to backfire at one time.

Special equipment such as radios, compasses, and first-aid kits was
used by the crew on all fires.

Various kinds of concentrated food were tried by the 40-man crew on
the fire line.

Table 3 lists items of food by weight and calorie content which proved
to be the most satisfactory combination. It is felt that through
further study, however, it might be possible to devise a lighter
ration with equal nutritive value.

On going to a fire each man carried two lunches on his belt to that no
time would be lost in preparing meals during the first shift on the
fire line.

TABLE 3.- *Ration list, 1 man 3 days*

+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| No.       | Item      | Weight in | Calorie   | Where to  |
|             |             |           |           | obtain    |
|             |             | lbs       | Content   |             |
+=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
| 1         | Eggs,     | 1/2       | 1,330     | Eddie     |
|             | powdered  |             |             | Bauer, 2d |
|             |             |             |             | and       |
|             |             |             |             | Seneca    |
|             |             |             |             | Sts.,     |
|             |             |             |             | Seattle,  |
|             |             |             |             | Wash., or |
|             |             |             |             | sports    |
|             |             |             |             |           |
|             |             |             |             | Craft     |
|             |             |             |             | Inc., 512 |
|             |             |             |             | Southeast |
|             |             |             |             | Yamhill   |
|             |             |             |             | St.,      |
|             |             |             |             | Portland  |
|             |             |             |             | Oreg.     |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 2         | Cervelot  | 1         | 1,800     | Nearly    |
|             |             |             |             | all       |
|             |             |             |             | grocers   |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 3         | Bacon,    | 1         | 2,600     | Do.       |
|             | canned    |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 4         | Soup      | 1/2       | 2,500     | Eddie     |
|             | concentra |             |             | Bauer, 2d |
|             | te          |             |             | and       |
|             |             |             |             | Seneca    |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
|             |             |             |             | Sts.,     |
|             |             |             |             | Seattle,  |
|             |             |             |             | Wash.     |
+=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
| 5         | Potatoes, | ½         | 1,800     | Do.       |
|             | dehydrate |             |             |             |
|             | d           |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 6         | Rice,     | 1         | 1,600     | Any       |
|             | white     |             |             | grocer    |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 7         | Apple     | ½         | 1,500     | Columbia  |
|             | concentra |             |             | Fruit     |
|             | te          |             |             | Processor |
|             |             |             |             | s,          |
|             |             |             |             |           |
|             |             |             |             | Inc.,     |
|             |             |             |             | Pateros,  |
|             |             |             |             | Wash.     |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 8         | Sugar     | ½         | 900       | Any       |
|             |             |             |             | grocer    |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 9         | Tomato    | ½         | 100       | Do.       |
|             | Juice     |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 10        | Hardtack  | 1         | 1,600     | Do.       |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 11        | Coffee    | ¼         | \-\-\-\-\ | Do.       |
|             |             |             | -\-\-\-\-\- |             |
|             |             |             | \-\-\-\-\-- |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 12        | Lemon     | ½         | 850       | Any       |
|             | Drops     |             |             | confectio |
|             |             |             |             | nary        |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 13        | Anchovy   | 1/8       | 600       | Any       |
|             | paste     |             |             | grocer    |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 14        | Dates     | 1         | 1,600     | Do.       |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 15        | Figs      | 1         | 1,400     | Do.       |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 16        | Salt      | 1/8       | \-\-\-\-\ | Do.       |
|             |             |             | -\-\-\-\-\- |             |
|             |             |             | \-\-\-\-\-- |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 17        | Butter,   | ½         | 3,500     | Order     |
|             | canned    |             |             | through   |
|             |             |             |             | grocer    |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 18        | Milk,     | ½         | 2,300     | Any       |
|             | powdered  |             |             | grocer    |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
|             | **Total\- | **11**    | **25,980* |             |
|             | \-\-\-\-\-\ |             | *           |             |
|             | -\-\-\-\-\- |             |             |             |
|             | -**         |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

According to dietitians, hard manual labor requires 3 calories pre
pound per hour.

A 180-pound man working and/or hiking 16 hours per day for 3 days
requires 25,920 calories. Therefore, the ration listed in table 3 is
ample, and the 2 lunches carried by the men on the first shift offer a
large margin safety.

Based on the experience of 1939, it is advisable for the leader of the
crew to make out a basic menu with a choice of substitutes of about
equal weight and calorie content.

The men may be allowed to choose any substitute listed in table 4.
This will assure a balanced food ration. It was found that a free
individual choice usually does not result in a balanced menu.

TABLE 4.-*Desirable substitutes for 40-man crew ration*

+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Number    | Item      | Weight    | Substitut | Where to  |
|             |             |             | e           | obtain    |
|             |             |             | for-      |             |
+=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
| 1         | Dried     | \-\-\-\-\ | Cervelot  | Any meat  |
|             | beef      | -\-\-\-\-\- |             | market    |
|             |             | \--         |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 2         | Lemon     | 12 ounces | Tomato    | Any       |
|             | Juice     |             | Juice     | grocer    |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 3         | Grapefrui | \-\-\--do | \-\-\-\-\ | Do.       |
|             | t           | \-\-\--     | -\-\-\--do\ |             |
|             | Juice     |             | -\-\-\-\-\- |             |
|             |             |             | \-\-\--     |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 4         | Raisins   | \-\-\--do | Dates     | Do.       |
|             |             | \-\-\--     |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 5         | Cheese,   | 8 ounces  | Anchovy   | Do.       |
|             | dried     |             | paste     |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 6         | Peaches,  | 1 pound   | Figs      | Do.       |
|             | dried     |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 7         | Apricots, | \-\-\--do | \-\-\-\-\ | Do.       |
|             | dried     | \-\-\--     | -\-\-\--do\ |             |
|             |             |             | -\-\-\-\-\- |             |
|             |             |             | \-\--       |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 8         | Spaghetti | 2 pounds  | Rice      | Do.       |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| 9         | Oatmeal   | \-\-\--do | \-\-\-\-\ | Do.       |
|             |             | \-\-\--     | -\-\-\--do\ |             |
|             |             |             | -\-\-\-\-\- |             |
|             |             |             | \-\--       |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

![](media/image213.jpeg){width="3.064233377077865in"
height="3.084374453193351in"}

Cooking on the fire line

**Transportation.-** Three 1939 model, 1 1/2 --ton Chevrolet trucks
were used for transportation of crew, supplies, and equipment to and
from most of the fires and on work projects. Two of these trucks were
equipped with comfortable, upholstered seats for hauling the men, and
one was used for supplies and fire packs.

On the longer and more tiring trips such as the 360-mile trip to the
Big Cow Creek fire on the Malheur and Whitman National Forests,
commercial busses were used. These busses added greatly to the comfort
of the men a made it possible for them to rest en route, and arrive on
the fire in better condition than if they had traveled by truck.

**Personnel Management.-** Some restrictions were required in order to
keep the men constantly within fire call. Camp rules were established,
outlining the responsibilities of the crew members as to fire duty,
fire calls, camp police duties, and personal conduct and appearance.
Only a few instances of infringement of these rules occurred during
the season. Tension of stand-by duty was lessened considerably by
frequent fire suppression jobs.

Opportunity was given to each member of the crew to leave camp
periodically to purchase tobacco and other personal effects and to
attend the local theater once or twice weekly, provided they signed
out and agreed to stay in a group going to and returning from the
theater. Excursion trips were made under the same arrangement.

Softball and volleyball tams were organized, and weekly games with
Cave Junction and the Oregon Canes CCC Camp were played throughout the
early part of the summer. Swimming, horseshoe pitching, and
punching-bag work-outs also absorbed no small amount of surplus
energy. Some leisure time was devoted to study of the handbooks,
bulletins, and periodicals contained in the 40-man crew library.
Leisure time classes in first-aid, lifesaving, and safety were
conducted by qualified crew members.

Because of the seriousness of the fire season and the shortage of
manpower caused by sickness and injury, only a small amount of annual
leave was given during the main part of the fire season. Two more men
were added to the crew during the latter part

of the season so that accumulated leave could be granted and till
maintain the crew strength of 40-men.

**Fire Training.-** Fire training was started in June 20, immediately
after the first large influx of recruits. Frequent training sessions
continued up to July 21, when the crew was called on the first fire.
An occasional training period was given subsequently for the benefit
of the new recruits.

In the first training periods emphasis was placed of fire line
organization and construction so that the crew would be in readiness
for immediate call. Training continued with practice hikes and drills
in unloading fire packs from trucks and reloading them again so that a
certain speed and precision was acquired in performing these routine
jobs. Conferences were held on methods of line construction, fire
behavior, and fire strategy in various fuel types, in conjunction with
the field training sessions.

Special training was given to selected crew members in radio
operation, fuel type mapping, and first aid by qualified instructors.

**Work Projects.-** Two work projects, located 9 miles from camp, were
selected to utilize the time and energy of the crew members when they
were not occupied with training or fire fighting or engaged in camp
construction activities. The purpose was threefold-namely, to keep the
men in good physical condition, to help finance the crew, and to
accomplish useful and needed work. The construction of the Illinois
Bridge and the Eight Dollar Mountain Road were the two projects
selected. The bridge was a creosoted wood, Howe truss structure, with
a main span of 137 ½ feet and an approach on one end of 52 feet. This
bridge was completed by the crew in the fall of 1939. A total of 815
man-days was spent on the project.

The crew spent a total of 672 man-days on the Eight Dollar Mountain
Road and brought a 2-mile section to about 75 percent of completion.

**Action of Fires**

The 40-man crew worked on 8 class C or larger fires located on 5
national forests in Region 6 between July 21 and September 2, 1939.
The two periods worked by this crew on the Saddle Mountain fire were
counted as two fires since they ere analyzed separately and were
widely divergent in location and time. The fires on which the 40- man
crew worked and the time and travel chargeable to these fires are
listed in table 5.

*TABLE 5.- Fires worked upon by the 40-man crew in 1939*

+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| No      | Name of | Forest  | Dates   | Days on | Miles   |
|           | Fire    |           |           | fire    |         |
|           |           |           |           |         | travele |
|           |           |           |           | (w/     | d         |
|           |           |           |           | travel) |           |
+===========+===========+===========+===========+===========+===========+
| 1       | Horsesh | Siskiyo | July 21 | 5 ½       | 80      |
|           | oe        | u         | - July  |           |           |
|           | Bend    |           | 26      |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 2       | Blue    | Willame | July 27 | 2       | 421     |
|           | River   | tte       | - July  |           |           |
|           |           |           | 28      |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 3       | Wheeler | Siskiyo | Aug 7   | 2       | 150     |
|           | Creek   | u         | -- Aug  |           |           |
|           |           |           | 8       |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 4       | Saddle  | Siuslaw | Aug 10  | 4       | 300     |
|           | Mtn.(ea |           | -- Aug  |           |           |
|           | st)       |           | 13      |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 5       | Willard | Columbi | Aug 14  | 4       | 543     |
|           |           | a         | -- Aug  |           |           |
|           |           |           | 17      |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 6       | Eagle   | Siskiyo | Aug 18  | 4       | 127     |
|           | Creek   | u         | -- Aug  |           |           |
|           |           |           | 21      |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 7       | Saddle  | Siuslaw | Aug 22  | 6       | 663     |
|           | Mtn(wes |           | -- Aug  |           |           |
|           | t)        |           | 26      |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 8       | Big Cow | Whitman | Aug 28  | 6       | 725     |
|           | Creek   |           | -- Sept |           |           |
|           |           |           | 2       |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
|           | **Total | **\-\-\ | **\-\-\ | **33 ½**  | **3,009 |
|           | \-\-\-\-\ | -\-\-\-\- | -\-\-\-\- |           | **        |
|           | -\-\-\-\- | \-\-\-\-\ | \-\-\-\-\ |           |           |
|           | -**       | -\-\--**  | -\-\-\-\- |           |           |
|           |           |           | \-\-\-\-\ |           |           |
|           |           |           | --**      |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

**Get-Away Action.-** Get away time on fires varied from31 to 75
minutes, according to circumstance at the time of the call. The crew
was dispatched from their headquarters camp on four occasions. Three
of these calls came in the late afternoon before supper and the fourth
immediately after breakfast. On two occasions the crew was working on
the road project 9 miles away, and it was necessary to assemble them
at camp before leaving.

If the call came near mealtime and the meal was practically prepared,
the men were usually fed before leaving. Assembling and feeding the
men resulted in rather slow get-away time on several occasions.
However, it is believed that the practice of feeding the men before
leaving is justified, particularly if a long trip of several hundred
miles is involved, because it avoids making a meal stop en route and
the men arrive in better condition than if they travel without food.

Experience in 1939 brought out that the following considerations
should govern action looking toward faster get-away time:

1.  Keep all members of the crew in direct telephone communication at
    all times. Use large extension bells, sirens, and other signals
    where necessary.

2.  Order lunches or prepared meals ahead on route of travel if time can
    be saved in this way.

3.  If dinner is prepared at camp at the time of the call, the crew
    should be allowed to eat before leaving in order to avoid losing
    time en route.

**Meals and Stops En Route.-** One or more meals were usually eaten en
route to the more distant fires. In all but a few cases, a dependable
restaurant was notified by phone in advance and no time was lost in
the preparation of meals.

**Time Distribution on Fires.-** Table 6 shows the distribution of
fire time for the 40-man crew, based on data recorded on the eight
fires upon which the crew worked.

These computations include time from start of work to completion of
control line on all fires or sectors of fires handled by the crew.

![](media/image214.jpeg){width="3.941584645669291in"
height="2.7759372265966755in"}

40-man crew hiking to a fire

*TABLE 6.- Time distribution of 40-man crew on fires*

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Time Element        | Total hours         | Percent of time     |
+=======================+=======================+=======================+
| Foot travel         | 12.31               | 4.1                 |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Worktime on fire    | 176.58              | 58.2                |
| line                |                       |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Time eating,        | 114.36              | 37.7                |
| sleeping, resting   |                       |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| **Total\-\-\-\-\-\- | **303.25**          | **100.0**           |
| \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\ |                       |                       |
| -\--**                |                       |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

Distribution of time as recorded above is shown graphically in the
chart below.

No comparable figures are available for other crews, but it is
believed that this table shows plainly the advantages of using self
sustaining crews in inaccessible sectors of fires. Foot travel to and
from such sectors by ordinary crews serviced in established base or
line camps usually consumes a great deal more than 4 percent of the
time of fire fighters and saps a tremendous about of energy of men who
are unaccustomed to hiking in rough country. The usually practice of
camping on or near the fire line wherever the night overtook the crew
insured the effective use of a large proportion of the day with a
minimum of lost motion. Truck- and foot-travel time to the fires from
the time the cr ew was dispatched up to the point control action was
started is not included in these figures. However, when determining
the distance practicable to dispatch such a crew, it should be
considered that more than one-quarter of the total time charged to
fires was consumed in travel by truck and on foot to the fires.

**Time Distribution Chart**

37.7%

58.2%

4.1%

**Organization and Method Used in Line Construction.-** A progressive
method of line construction, which in reality is a variation of the
one-lick method, was used successfully by the 40-man crew on all fire
suppression work.

The progressive method used has the advantages of the one-lick method;
namely, the elimination of lost time occasioned by men passing each
other in the line and the enthusiasm and unity of effort generated by
rapid and continuous progress. It is superior to the one-lick method
in that men can do more effective work by taking a stance and
completing a unit of work and each man can be held accountable for a
given segment of line. The form of organization is illustrated in the
diagram on page 57.

A description of the organization of the men on the line and their
duties under the progressive system follows:

1.  A scout from the crew was used when no outside scout was provided.
    When not scouting, this man worked as an axman.

2.  The line locator selected the location and blazed the way. He was
    directed from the time to time by the crew leader as information was
    received from the scout or direct observations of the fire were
    made.

3.  Nine axmen, using three cruiser's axes and six 3 ½ -pound swamping
    axes, followed the locator. Ordinarily the ax crew did from 50 to
    100 percent of the clearing, depending on the relative amount of
    clearing to be done as compared with digging and holding.

4.  Ten Pulaski men worked behind the axmen and cleared or dug line as
    the needs justified. The Pulaski men hold a unique and vital
    position on the line. By using the cutting edge of the tool for
    clearing they may speed the clearing and slow the hoe work, and by
    turning over the same tool the opposite effect can be accomplished.
    The versatility of the Pulaski men enabled the crew to adapt itself
    to a great variety of cover types without changing the line-up of
    tools.

5.  Ten hoe men followed the Pulaski men and completed the line digging.
    IN favorable types one or more Kortich tools were substituted for
    hoes. Six of the hoe men carried extra shovels to the point of
    attack so as to have them when needed to assist in holding and
    mopping up the line. These extra shovels were called into action on
    almost every fire in order to take care of the emergency
    "break-overs" and spot fires which the usual shovel crew could not
    handle. After arrival on the fire, the spare shovels were carried by
    the shovel men in an extra pack sack with the fusees and other
    miscellaneous items. By following this practice, the hoe men were
    not burdened with an extra tool while working.

6.  Four regular shovel men were on hand at all times to do the
    burning-out and holding the line behind the line construction men.

7.  Two sets of fallers equipped with falling tools worked as and where
    needed for falling or bucking. They were usually directed by the
    coordinator.

DIAGRAM OF PROGRESSIVE METHOD OF LINE CONSTRUCTION USED BY THE 40-MAN
CREW

![](media/image215.jpeg){width="4.279678477690289in"
height="1.992603893263342in"}

8.  One man was always used to carry water, and two were so employed
    when needed.

The crew leader controlled the movement of the squads in such a way as
to affect the highest rate of held-line production. A qualified squad
boss was used as a line locator. When not engaged in locating he was
in charge of the ax crew. Where he considered of vital importance the
leader did his own locating. The second squad boss was in charge of
the Pulaski crew. It was his responsibility to keep a balance of work
between clearing and digging by shifting his men from one operation to
the other as needs arose. The third squad boss was in charge of the
hoe crew. It was his function to complete the line and cooperate with
the burning-out and holding of the completed line until it was taken
over by the follow-up crew.

**Numbering of Men and Packs.-** Each man of the crew was given a
number, according to his place in the line and, except for a few
changes, each man kept this number throughout the summer. Each fire
pack was also numbered 1 to 40, corresponding to the number of the man
carrying the pack.

![](media/image216.jpeg){width="3.3568121172353456in"
height="3.1066666666666665in"}

Building fire line

Unloading from the trucks and hiking to the fire form was done in
sequence numbers. Upon returning from the fire the packs were placed
in the truck in reverse order from which they were taken out- that is,
number 40 pack was the first to be loaded. This system of unloading
and loading made for speed and precision. A quick deployment of men in
working positions was facilitated by arriving at the point of attack
in regular formation.

**Foot Travel.-** Upon reaching the end of motor transportation, each
man received his pack and the crew was led over trail or rough country
in single file formation to the point of attack. Rest stops were made
during hikes as needed. Average rate of foot travel was computed at
2.5 miles per hour, including rest stops of less than 30 minutes.

**Deployment of the Crew on Fire.-** Upon arrival on the fire, a quick
size-up was made and, if necessary, the 40-man crew scout was sent out
to look over the country immediately ahead. Scouting was usually done
by scouts not attached to the 40-man

crew. If the entire crew worked as one unit, they fell to work in line
in the regular unloading and hiking order. If the crew was split into
tow units, as was occasionally done, the even-numbered men went one
way and the odds another. This resulted in the even division of both
men and tools. Unless the direct method was used, the burning-out crew
followed and kept apace, but at a short distance behind the hoe crew.
If a follow-up crew was worked immediately behind, the burning-out
crew was usually able to keep up without additional help. If adequate
follow-up was not provided, however, it became necessary to drop more
and more men form line construction work to burning out and holding.

The practice of splitting the crew into two or three work units worked
out very satisfactorily on spot fires and in cover having low to
medium resistance-to-control factors. The gain in splitting of crews,
of course, is brought about by saving in total time devoted to
walking. In high resistance-to-control types, however, the relative
saving in walking time is much reduced, and it is believed the
advantage is negligible in an extreme resistance-to-control type.
Another advantage of a split crew is that work can often begin at the
ahead of a fire, and one unit can work each way to affect a faster
control.

The greatest disadvantage in the division of the unit was the
difficulty of giving adequate supervision. This disadvantage can be
overcome by careful training of overhead. In the heavy
resistance-to-control types found on three fires in 1939 the crew
worked to greatest advantage as one unit.

**Packing on the Fire Line.-** An ever-existing problem was that of
keeping the fire packs up with the men. This problem was solved by
using a variety of methods as follows:

1.  By intersecting the fire at a central point so that the crew can
    work both ways from the starting point. Upon arrival at a fire it
    was often possible to predict where the crew would stop work at the
    end of the shift and drop the packs there.

2.  By leaving pack at the point where work began and retuning after
    them when an opportunity permitted.

3.  By delegating the burning-out crew to take charge of moving the
    packs forward as the line progressed.

4.  By delegating as FF or CCC crew to carry packs ahead from time to
    time. Horse packing was not feasible on account of the
    inaccessibility of the country in which the 40- man crew worked.
    Horses were utilized but once during the season.

**Follow-Up.-** One of the biggest problems which confronted the
40-man crew was securing adequate follow-up action. Almost every
forest on which the crew worked showed a readiness to cooperate by
sending ample follow-up behind the 40-man crew. The failures usually
arose from not making certain that the men arrived when and where they
were needed. For example, on one fire a night crew was sent out, but
they were poorly guided and did not arrive. On another fire they
worked on a "cold" line to the neglect of a mile of "hot" line. In
each instance it was necessary for the 40-man crew to put in a double
shift in order to prevent the loss of line they had constructed. It is
recognized that the ordinary follow-up crew hiking in from a central
camp each day, is under a tremendous handicap. After the second or
third day behind the 40-man crew, the follow-up crew spends more and
more time walking to and from work, which progressively reduces the
amount of time and energy available for effective action on the

line. The solution to this problem apparently lies in equipping the
follow-up crew with light sleeping bas and condensed rations so that
they too can stay out on the line.

**Cover types.-** Several cover types were encountered by the 40-man
crew, including high and low brush, Douglas fir timber, lodge-pole
deadenings, and ponderosa pine types and snag areas. The progressive
method of line construction, with slight variations, worked well in
all these types, and the crew probed to be a versatile unit and
readily adapted itself to the various conditions encountered. The
tools carried by the crew adequately met the needs in all types
encountered. The Pulaski tools are the "balance wheels" which made it
possible to work efficiently in the various types with the same
equipment. Experience during the 1939 indicates that a trained crew of
40 men is about the proper size for work in moderate and high
resistance-to-control types such as are encountered over most of the
Douglas fir region, and that smaller units of about 20 men will work
more efficiently in the low resistance-to-control cover which is
characteristic of ponderosa pine forests.

**Accomplishments**

A careful record was made of the action of the crew and rate of line
construction on each fire. At the completion of the fire season a
detailed review was made of each fire by the leader of the crew. Space
will not allow these records or reviews to be presented here. By way
of summary, however, two measurements of the efficiency of the crew
are given by comparing its rate of held-line production with the
Region 6 standard was made by computing the length of time that it
would take to build under regional standards the same line as was
constructed by the 40-man crew on the various fires. In making these
computations due weight was given to the proportion or length of line
on each fire in the different resistance-to-control classes. Complete
data for this comparison were taken on six fires are summarized in
table 7.

*TABLE 7.- Held line production, 40-man crew 1939, compared to Region
6 standard*

+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Name | Resi | Cont | Rati | Tota |        | 40-m | Regi |
| of   | stance | rol    | ng     | l      |        | an     | on     |
| fire | to   |      |        | Line |        | prod | 6    |
| [^1^]( |        | Chai |        | Work |        | uction | stan |
| #_book |        | ns     |        | ed     |        | held | dard   |
| mark9) |        |        |        |        |        | line | held |
|        |        |        |        |        |        |      | line |
|        |        |        |        |        |        | per  |      |
|        |        |        |        |        |        | man  | per  |
|        |        |        |        |        |        | hr   | man  |
|        |        |        |        |        |        | chai | hr   |
|        |        |        |        |        |        | ns     | chai |
|        |        |        |        |        |        |        | ns     |
+========+========+========+========+========+========+========+========+
|        | Low  | Medi | High | Chai | Hour |        |        |
|        |        | um     |        | ns[^2^ | s      |        |        |
|        |        |        |        | ](#_bo |        |        |        |
|        |        |        |        | okmark |        |        |        |
|        |        |        |        | 10)    |        |        |        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Hors | 51   | 42   | 19   | 112  | 67.4 | 1.66 | 0.53 |
| eshoe  |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| Bend |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Whee | 15   | 25   | 22   | 62   | 46.5 | 1.33 | .45  |
| ler    |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| Cree |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| k      |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Sadd | 55   | 30   | 9    | 94   | 87.1 | 1.08 | .62  |
| le     |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| Mtn  |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| (eas |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| t)     |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Will | 32   | 20   | 7    | 59   | 42.5 | 1.39 | .56  |
| ard    |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Eagl | 40   | 124  | 63   | 227  | 319. | .72  | .42  |
| e      |        |        |        |        | 8      |        |        |
| Cree |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| k      |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| Big  | 97   | 29   | 4    | 140  | 100. | 1.39 | .73  |
| Cow  |        |        |        |        | 5      |        |        |
| Cree |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| k      |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+
| **To | **29 | **28 | **12 | **69 | **66 | **1. | **.5 |
| tal    | 0**    | 0**    | 4**    | 4**    | 3.8**  | 04**   | 1**    |
| or   |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| Aver |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| age**  |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+

[]{#_bookmark9 .anchor}^1^ Accurate data were available only on 6
fires

[]{#_bookmark10 .anchor}^2^ This figure includes only length or record
held line. About 1/3 of held line built was recorded and given
resistance-to-control ratings. A total of 28 miles of control line was
worked in 1939, in addition to a large amount of unmeasured work on
spot fires.

The comparison of the accomplishments of the 40-man crew with other
crews shows that throughout the season it attained an average rate of
held-line production of

0.34 chains per man-hour as compared with 0.07 chains per man-hour for
large crews working in Region 6 on fires 300 acres or larger from 1936
to 1938, inclusive. The data for these large crews were taken from the
July 1939 issue of Fire Control Notes. It may be noted that the rate
of line production in this second comparison is less then that shown
in table 7. This is accounted for by the fact that burning-out,
holding, and mop-up, as well as travel time while on a fire or sector
of a fire, were included when computing this average in order to make
the 40-man crew rates comparable to those listed in Fire Control
Notes.

These figures show that the 40-man crew produced line at twice the
speed set up by Region 6 standards and about five times the rate
produced by other crews on all large fires in Region 6 over the last
three years. Even so, these figures do not give a true picture of the
efficiency of the 40-man crew in comparison with other crews because
of the following factors:

1.  In the first comparison the regional standards are based on small as
    well as large fires, and accomplishments on small fires are usually
    greater than on fires of the size acted upon by the 40-man crew.

2.  The 40-man unit was in most cases dispatched to the most rugged and
    remote sectors of the fires in which the fatigue factor of travel is
    more pronounced than for crews working near the road.

3.  The 40-man unit was sometimes used as "pinch hitters" on sectors
    difficult for other crews to hold. On these sectors the 40-man crew
    was valuable chiefly as a holding crew and line production was a
    secondary factor. After hours of difficult holding under heavy smoke
    conditions, the crew was in poor condition for high production on
    the line.

**Weak Points**

The 40-man crew was organized and trained as a line-building crew.
Plans were made for the 40-man crew to burn out and hold their own
line for about 3 hours after construction, after which time the line
would be taken over by an FF or CCC crew. The men were told that they
would be expected to work at a fast rate of speed for a definite shift
of 8 to 10 hours and that mop-up and holding would be taken over by
another crew. To work a longer shift would definitely call for a
slower pace.

As it actually worked on many of the fires, the men walked long
distances, then worked on line construction at a fast pace for 8 to 10
hours; but instead of being relieved it was necessary for the crew to
do their own mop-up and patrol for long periods after the line was
constructed. This worked the men excessively long hours. In one case
the crew was engaged more than 20 hours in continuous work and travel
with only short intervals of rest. It is not physically possible to
continue at a fast pace for such long periods, and the men will
consciously slow their pace to avoid complete fatigue.

The ultimate results of this practice, if continued, will be to slow
down the rate of line production. The men will expect to stay out on
the line for excessive hours and will work at a speed commensurate
with those hours in order to sustain themselves throughout the day. In
working excessive hours day after day, we have lost sight of that part
of our

objective of maintaining a fire-fighting crew capable of working at
unprecedented speed to stop the first run of fire, burn out the line,
and turn the mop-up over to a relief crew.

**Costs**

A total allotment of \$35,090 was set up to the forest to finance the
40-man crew from the time of recruiting to the end of the fiscal year
1940. This allotment was planned to cover all costs of camp
construction, subsistence, transportation, and wages throughout the
work season, including fire suppression and project work. It was
planned that a contingent of \$7,000 should be carried over to finance
the crew in the spring of 1940.

Actual expenditures for the crew through the season of 1939 totaled
\$30,914. Of this amount \$2,642 was spent on overhead and \$5,491 was
used for the subsistence of the crew. The entire cost of camp
construction and maintenance totaled \$6,245 and fire training was
recorded at \$1,082. The contribution to fire suppression work by the
40- man crew amounted to \$6,742. All other cost, including labor,
cost of transportation to and from work on the bridge and road
projects, and other miscellaneous items of cost, totaled \$8,712. The
work of the crew on these two projects was appraised at \$5,000 at the
close of the season.

The balance in the available allotment, plus the unexpended F.R.D.
earnings, amounts to \$9,176, which will be available to pay the
salary of the leader during the balance of the present fiscal year and
finance the crew for approximately 2 months next spring.

**Conclusions**

It is felt that the 40-man crew experiment was successful in achieving
the purpose for which it was conceived. The careful selection and
methodical training of personnel and the choice of lightweight
equipment, including concentrated rations, featherweight beds, and
up-to-date fire tools, combined to make a sturdy fire-fighting unit of
great mobility, which was able to sustain itself in inaccessible
country for periods of 72 hours or more and take effective independent
action on the most remote sectors of a fire. The merits of this form
of organization are obviously shown in the records of rate of line
construction contained herein.

It is believed that this system can be applied to other crews
organized from picked CCC enrollees and the personnel of construction
crews. Units so organized will probably not measure up to the 40-man
crew in physical development, but would have the advantage of mobility
and self-reliance made possible by the use of lightweight beds,
concentrated rations, and a judicious balance of tools.

It is also believed that the special equipment can be used to
advantage by crews of untrained pick-up laborers by enabling them to
stay out on the fire line, thus reducing the large expenditure of time
and energy used in walking to and from established camps and
curtailing the expense of servicing fire-fighters in inaccessible
country.

1

**Where Did We Get Our Hotshot Crews?**

By Lincoln Bramwell, PhD, Historian, USDA Forest Service

Interagency Hotshot Crews (IHCs) form the backbone of the Forest
Service's response to wildland fire. IHCs are twenty-person, rapid
response fire crews specializing in large fires the federal government
dispatches to trouble spots across the nation. Due to their high
levels of physical fitness, training, self-reliance and expertise,
they are the Forest Service's elite firefighters, relied upon to fight
the worst fires in the toughest terrain under the most dangerous
circumstances. The Forest Service developed hotshot crews specifically
to fight fires in the West's rugged terrain. After a 1935 decision to
control all fires the morning following their first report and became
national policy, the

U.S. Forest Service designated hotshot crews as the means to achieve
its policy ends.

\* \* \* \*

The loss of seventy-eight lives in the devastating Northern Rockies
fires of 1910 provided the catalyst for public and Congressional
support of fire suppression.[^1^](#_bookmark12) The 1911 Weeks Act
legislated emergency firefighting funds making aggressive wildland
fire suppression a reality. In the decade following the 1910 fires,
the U.S. Forest Service experimented with various firefighting
strategies. Newly designated Chief Henry S. Graves commented on the
importance of using trained, organized crews to protect forests from
blazes. In a 1910 Forest Service bulletin he wrote: "The following are
of 1^st^ importance: 1) Quick arrival at the fire; 2) and adequate
force; 3) proper equipment; 4) a thorough organization of the fighting
crew; and 5) skill in attacking and fighting
fires."[^2^](#_bookmark11)

Following its increased desire to suppress wildfires, the Forest
Service studied factors that led to large, destructive fires. After
examining conflagrations such as the

2

Tillamook, Oregon burn of 1933 that scorched 270,000 acres, one of the
principal causes of the failure to contain these blazes was the lack
of explicit guidelines for initial attack.[^3^](#_bookmark13) As one
USFS forester recalled:

\[Investigations of disastrous fires\] found one characteristic common
to all of them: lack of aggressive all-out action due to the 'too
little or too late,' 'take-a- chance,' 'herd-em,' 'let-burn' attitudes
resulting from fire-control policies then in effect in many places.
With that germ isolated, the specific curative treatment was not long
in being discovered and applied.[^4^](#_bookmark14)

The cure was a national fire policy that shaped suppression for the
next forty-five years. In 1935, USFS Chief Ferdinand Silcox issued a
national wildland fire directive.

Known as the 10 AM Policy, the mandate standardized the response to
wildfire. The policy ordered firefighters to control a fire by 10 AM
the morning after its first report, making aggressive fire suppression
the standard response. Suppressing fires by 10 AM the morning after
the report was also viewed as cost effective because it was far less
expensive to suppress a number of small fires than to suppress one
large conflagration.[^5^](#_bookmark15)

By 1939 the agency completed experiments and adopted two programs to
carry out the 10 AM Policy goals. Conceived as small fire specialists,
smokejumpers could quickly stop small fires in remote, roadless
backcountry areas.[^6^](#_bookmark16) If small fires grew into
conflagrations, then specially trained forty-man crews would fight
them for extended periods.[^7^](#_bookmark17) Both programs were
successful and are still used in modified forms today. As the West's
remote backcountry shrank in size, smokejumping remained a small
program.[^8^](#_bookmark18) In contrast, the forty-man crew developed
into the interagency hotshot program that serves as the foundation of
campaign fire fighting efforts.

For many years, USFS fire wardens and management officers desired
better- organized fire crews.[^9^](#_bookmark19) With the restriction
on using Civilian Conservation Corps enrollees

3

on fires during the 1930s, experiments began in 1939 to create
economically efficient firefighting crews. L.L. Colvill, Assistant
Forest Supervisor on the Siskiyou National Forest in Oregon, spent
much of the previous summer battling the largest fires in the Pacific
Northwest. He found fires in the backcountry presented problems for
poorly conditioned, trained, and supervised fire crews. They simply
took too long to get to a fire, were too worn out from the hike to be
effective on the fireline, and were not adept at living away from
their base for several days without considerable support. Colvill
recognized the need for "trained crews of physically \[sic\] supermen
capable of sustaining themselves on the fire line for periods of
several days with a minimum of \[support\]."[^10^](#_bookmark47)
Intrigued, the Forest Service ordered the supervisor of the Siskiyou
National Forest to organize a forty-man crew of "supermen" to test
Colvill's theory.

Nearly all future hotshot crew protocol and routine came from the
Siskiyou experiment. First, the supervisors chose a junior forester
with ten years of fire experience to lead the new crew. They based
prospective members' selection on their "physical prowess,
woodsmanship, and self-motivation." Operating on the "every private a
captain" principle, the supervisors wanted experienced personnel who
could make decisions during critical situations. Two recent hotshot
superintendents wrote of the experiment's guiding principles;
"Professionalism, through organization, training, and experience
incorporated not only safety, but a commitment to excellence,
technical expertise, strong esprit d'corps, and a no excuses 'can-do
attitude.'"[^11^](#_bookmark46) One forester colorfully described the
crew as "compact gangs of smoke-eating hellions in which every last
man is a triple-threat to any fire."[^12^](#_bookmark45) Potential
candidates had to be males between the ages of twenty-one and forty in
addition to having experience. Except for some

4

exceptions as fire lookouts, the Forest Service held a de facto policy
that excluded women from firefighting. Because their duties required
extended time away from their duty station, the job attracted
unmarried foresters, a pattern that is still evident today. In
addition to attracting a majority of unmarried foresters, the Siskiyou
experiment attracted men from rural upbringings, comfortable with
physical labor in the outdoors.

Each man carried enough provisions to support himself for three days
in order to tackle fires in the inaccessible backcountry where
logistical support was difficult to arrange. The supervisors on the
Siskiyou estimated the caloric intake for each man at three calories
per pound per hour. Thus, a 180-pound man working sixteen-hour days
for three days required an amazing 25,920 calories. The high calories
were essential to a crew expected to work at unprecedented speed to
stop the first run of a fire. One forester described the crew's job:
"It is man-killing work too, for the pace set is terrific and no
woodsman likes to show or to admit fatigue."[^13^](#_bookmark44)

The forty-man crew experiment on the Siskiyou National Forest was a
resounding success. Forest supervisors studying the performance of the
crew after the 1939 season found that in the course of traveling over
3,000 miles to fight fires on five different national forests of
varying fuel types, the crew constructed an average of three times the
amount of fireline per hour than the regular Forest Service crews. The
leaders of the crew felt that even this incredible figure
underestimated performance because the fireline they constructed
usually fell in the roughest terrain on the hottest part of the fire.
Significantly, efficiency and lack of logistical support brought the
costs of financing the forty-man crew to thirty percent below that of
a comparable crew of Forest Service firefighters.[^14^](#_bookmark43)

5

America's entry into World War II took away much of the Forest
Service's manpower, particularly the Civilian Conservation Corps
firefighters, necessitating reliance on forty-man crews. The federal
government recognized that protecting America's timber resources was
essential to the war effort, but the military draft dramatically
decreased the number of men the Forest Service could retain for fire
fighting. During the war, women entered the firelines for the first
time, replacing large numbers of men drafted into military service.
Like most wartime occupations, women were laid off after the war to
make way for returning servicemen. After being dismissed from the
firelines, women did not return until after the 1964 Civil Rights Act
prohibited discrimination on the basis of sex.[^15^](#_bookmark42) The
act however, did not bring an immediate return. Not until the early to
mid-1970s did women work on firelines again. The very first woman to
do so is lost to history; her story became a myth that varies from
region to region.

After the war ended and the Forest Service permanently lost the
manpower and large budgets from New Deal programs like the CCC,
experiments began to reduce the forty-man crew's size and cost. Near
the Siskiyou, the Willamette National Forest developed a smaller
twenty-man crew. When fire calls came the crew gathered at prearranged
points before traveling to the fire. Dubbed the "Willamette Flying
20," the supervisors organized the crew with one foreman and two squad
bosses as overhead management, a pattern generations of hotshot crews
subsequently adopted.[^16^](#_bookmark41)

By the end of the war, the twenty-man crew emerged as a more than
adequate response to the 10 AM Policy. It also materialized as an
exclusively male occupation. Early experiments illustrated how
organization, training, and physical fitness combined

6

to create a fire crew that proved efficient, cost-effective, and safe.
Recognizing that the experimental crews were given the toughest
assignments and performed their duties with much greater speed and
without significant injuries, Forest Service officials began to
understand the potential benefits specially trained and organized hand
crews had to offer.

Reliance on smaller variations of the original forty-man crew
continued after the end of World War II. Routinely, the USFS pressed
non-specialist employees into fire crews known as "regulars" for local
fires, but to control fires by 10 AM required mobile, flexible and
well-organized crews. By 1947, following the examples of the Oregon
Red Hats and the Willamette Flying 20, twenty-man crews appeared in
the chaparral covered national forests of Southern
California.[^17^](#_bookmark40) Based in the San Bernardino,
Cleveland, Angeles and Los Padres National Forests, the Southern
California crews first used the title "hotshot."[^18^](#_bookmark39)
The new title reflected the speed of the mobile crews and their
fearlessness as they shot into the hottest parts of the fire. It also
was indicative of the self-confident image the crews wanted to portray
as they instituted themselves as the most effective option to fighting
large western fires. Streamlining as much as possible to decrease
their response time to fires, these Southern California crews shrank
in size but increased in effectiveness.

More than anything else, the development of mechanized fire equipment
impacted crew structure. The original forty-man crews required eleven
to eighteen men to fell trees and clear smaller vegetation with axes
and hand-saws. By the 1950s new lighter power chainsaws required only
six men to accomplish an equal or greater amount of
work.[^19^](#_bookmark20) The helicopter increased hotshot crew
mobility by rapidly delivering

7

them into critical fire areas. The use of helicopters so impressed a
1950 fire conference in Ogden, Utah that it recommended "aerial shock
troops" be stationed at critical locations throughout the nation.
Despite advances in weather prediction and observation in recent
years, firefighting technology changed little since the introduction
of the helicopter and chainsaw. It is still left to firefighters on
the ground with simple handtools to stop a fire's
advance.[^20^](#_bookmark38)

The Forest Service established five Interregional (IR) Fire
Suppression Crews in 1961 based on the 1950 Ogden conference's idea to
place "aerial shock troops" at strategic
locations.[^21^](#_bookmark37) The delay was due in large part to the
size of the agency's bureaucracy and the time it takes to adjust
policy. Modeled on the half dozen hotshot crews operating in
California in the 1950s, IRs consisted of close to twenty members. IR
crews' size, structure, and mobility place them in the same lineage of
today's hotshot crews. Beginning each June, an IR crew would remain on
call twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. When not on duty,
sign out sheets informed supervisors of the whereabouts of crewmembers
in case of a fire call. The IR crews were advantageous because they
could reach any location in the West within six to eight hours, and
arrived as a complete package: supervisors, crew, tools, radios,
bedding and enough food for forty-eight hours.[^22^](#_bookmark36) The
Forest Service coordinated all requests for IR crews from the National
Fire Control Center in Washington, DC.[^23^](#_bookmark35) By 1963 the
number of IR crews had doubled to ten and the rapid growth rate
continued before the hotshot program consumed them over the next
decade.

In the 1960s hotshot crews began distinguishing themselves from
"regular" fire crews through crew insignia, hats, and t-shirts. The
pride associated with this separation

8

became one of the key ingredients to IHC success. Several crews began
wearing shoulder patches on the new orange fire-resistant shirts first
issued in 1961.[^24^](#_bookmark34) The El Cariso (California)
Hotshots wore berets during the 1960s, in emulation of Special Forces
in Vietnam. By this time hotshots crews adopted orange flame retardant
shirts, hard hats, blue jeans and a pair of White's logging boots\--a
hand-stitched, cowboy-heel boot that could cost a month's salary\--as
their own standard fireline attire.[^25^](#_bookmark33)

The IHC program enjoyed success and acceptance from federal fire
officials by the 1970s. Struggling with the dual challenges of sharply
rising fuel and mechanized equipment and aircraft costs and shrinking
budgets related to the national recession, the USFS searched for ways
to save money.[^26^](#_bookmark32) The hotshot program received praise
for its cost efficient performance. Fire management officers pointed
out that hotshot crews produced fifty percent more fireline than
regular Forest Service crews.[^27^](#_bookmark31) One fire officer on
the Tonto National Forest in Arizona explained that three hotshot
crews on his forest saved millions of dollars in projected suppression
costs and resource losses.[^28^](#_bookmark46)

By the end of the 1970s, a number of forest ecology and wildlife
researchers, along with acts of Congress and new fire management
techniques, combined to alter federal fire policy. The 1964 Wilderness
Act declared designated areas within national forests off limits to
mechanized fire suppression equipment. In addition, some fire managers
recognized that fire equipment such as bulldozers sometimes damaged
more land than they protected. New research on forest ecology,
particularly in relation to wilderness areas, began to suggest fire
played a beneficial role in forest ecosystem health. Concurrent with
this, the controlled application of fire to the ecosystem, known as
prescribed burning, gained wider acceptance as an effective tool to
increase forest

9

health and prevent large conflagrations.[^29^](#_bookmark30) All these
factors led to the replacement of the 10 AM Policy at a National Fire
Planning Meeting in Denver in July 1977. The new National Forest
Manual rejected the old policy's implicit assumption that all fires
were bad. The new management policy still mandated aggressive initial
attack on fires, but if initial attack failed, the incident commander
had many more alternatives, such as allowing naturally caused fires to
run their course or initiating a cost benefit analysis before extended
suppression efforts began. Hotshots had little to do with the 10 AM
Policy's abandonment, and despite the policy alteration, hotshots' job
on the ground did not change.[^30^](#_bookmark44)

Concurrent with the new policy the first females broke into hotshot
crew ranks in the late 1970s. Besides the biggest hurdle of the
physical ability to do the work, once on the job female hotshots had
to endure the sexism and chauvinism of a formerly all- male occupation
and the extra pressure and scrutiny this entails. The path-breaking
women experienced a combination of acceptance and resistance. The
loudest resistance most often came from the older generation of fire
fighters and managers. For example, Carl Hickerson, head of USFS fire
operations for the Pacific Northwest region in the early 1970s,
repeated a speech to senior fire officials over the course of a year
and a half titled, "Should Firefighters Wear Petticoats?" His
argument, that women lacked the emotional stability to make critical
decisions and their presence would diminish the stature of
firefighters, was enthusiastically received. "I simply cannot imagine
a truly feminine woman even considering fire suppression work, and all
the adversity, filth, and hazard it entails," Hickerson
claimed.[^31^](#_bookmark40) In fire camps, the first women endured
whistles, stares, and obscenities. Former hotshot Lael Gorman
recalled, "Back then, I

10

knew I was in a job that was basically a man's world. I told myself
that I had chosen to be there, so I accepted a lot...I accepted things
in that time that no woman would accept now and that most men would
find objectionable."[^32^](#_bookmark29) One of the first female
hotshots, Cheryl Surface-Wilcock, remembered entering the Silver State
Hotshots' ready room in Carson City, Nevada in 1977 to find the walls
plastered with *Playboy* centerfolds. Often the public's introduction
to female hotshots was skeptical as well. Surface-Wilcock remembered
washing off soot from a fire in a restaurant's women's bathroom to the
horror of other female patrons. One asked, "You mean they let girls
fight fire?" Her fellow female hotshot chimed in, "No ma'am, we just
make sandwiches and sweep rocks." Satisfied, the patrons returned to
their meals.[^33^](#_bookmark28) As more women broke down the all-male
world of wildland firefighting and hotshot crews in particular, they
won the begrudging respect of their peers.

During the last quarter of the century, increasing outdoor recreation
and home building at the edges of forests and grasslands put more
lives and property at risk of wildfire than ever
before.[^34^](#_bookmark27) In one policy review the Forest Service
warned that "More and more people are moving away from the city...and
away from things they generally take for granted, like fire
protection. A house or a group of houses in an otherwise undeveloped
area can turn a routine fire into a nightmare for firefighters and
homeowners."[^35^](#_bookmark26) As an "ex-urban" population reclaimed
the rural landscape, the need for hotshot crews that could handle the
technical challenge of urban interface fire escalated. The hotshots
accepted the increased suppression burden. By 1981 there were
fifty-four hotshot crews nationwide.[^36^](#_bookmark25) The
Department of Interior started its own hotshot crews among its
subordinate agencies. Starting in 1981 with the National Park

11

Service's Arrowhead, Alpine, and Bison hotshot crews, the Bureau of
Land Management and Bureau of Indian Affairs each fielded hotshot
crews by the mid 1980s.

Hotshot crews, now totaling one hundred and eight, continue to
shoulder the responsibility of suppressing large
fires.[^37^](#_bookmark24) With ever increasing pressure by the public
to protect its urban/rural interface homes and the extremely high
complexity of that challenge, the specialized skills of the hotshots
remain in high demand. Stretched to the limits to protect homes and
natural resources and driven by their can-do attitudes, hotshot crews
suffered a number of fatalities in the last half of the 20^th^
century. In light of recent tragedies, however, fire management has
adopted the tenet "Firefighter safety comes first on every fire, every
time."[^38^](#_bookmark23) While the public's perception of the Forest
Service's ability, obligation and eagerness to suppress all wildland
fires may not change, the agency and the hotshots themselves
recognized there are definite limitations to their fire suppression
mission. Their tempered aggressiveness is reflected in today's
National Interagency Hotshot Crew Steering Committee's official motto:
"Safety, Teamwork, Professionalism."[^39^](#_bookmark22)

Wildland fire is an ever-increasing threat in the West. The intensity
and frequency of fires crescendo each year.[^40^](#_bookmark21) As
more and more people move into formerly rural areas, the demand for
fire suppression and protection increases each year.

Examining the history of the elite firefighters relied upon to carry
out these demands provides a better understanding of the changing
nature of federal fire policy and its relationship with the men and
women who implement that policy.

^1^ Jim Cook et. al., *Lessons Learned, Fatality Fire Case Studies PMS
490,* Trainee Workbook, (Boise, Idaho: National Wildfire Coordinating
Group, December 1998), 2. See also Stephen Pyne. *Year of the Fires:
The Story of the Great Fires of 1910,* (New York: Penguin Books,
2002).

12

[]{#_bookmark11 .anchor}^2^ Graves, "Protection of Forest from Fire"
*Forest Service Bulletin,* no. 82, 1910.

^3^ Stephen J. Pyne, Patricia L. Andrews, and Richard D. Laven,
*Introduction to Wildland Fire*, (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1996),
412. The first of the Tillamook destroyed over 270,000 acres of dense
Douglas-fir timber in the coastal range of Oregon in August of 1933.
The region burned successively almost every six years until by 1951,
nearly 3 million acres of timber had burned in the area.

^4^ Earl W. Loveridge, "The Fire Suppression Policy of the U.S. Forest
Service," *Journal of Forestry,* 42 (1944), 552.

^5^ Ibid., 552. Pyne, *Fire in America,* 282-286.

^6^ There are many records and accounts detailing the inception and
growth of the smokejumping program. For early accounts of this see
"History of Smokejumping," (U.S. Forest Service, 1976); "History of
Smokejumping, 1939-1949," Fire Control Notes, 11 (July 1950), 1-11;
David P. Godwin, "Smokejumping," *American Forests*, 45 (December
1939), 590 -592; and "The Parachute Method of Fire Suppression,"
*Journal of Forestry*, 39 (February 1941), 169-171. The National
Smokejumper Association released an excellent visual history in 2000.
The video is available directly from the Association at PO Box 4081,
Missoula, MT 59806-4081.

^7^ In an effort to stop a fire, wildland firefighters construct
breaks in the vegetation known as firelines. By cutting away
vegetation with saws and digging away the remaining organic material
down to mineral soil, a fireline starves the fire of fuels to burn,
thereby stopping a slow moving blaze.

^8^ Craig Chandler, et al., *Fire in Forestry: Volume II: Forest Fire
Management and Organization,* (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1983),
123.

^9^ Pyne, *Fire in America,* 368; Guthrie, 238; " 'One Lick' Method on
the Chippewa," *Fire Control Notes*

(1937), 301.

^10^ L.L. Colvill, "Lessons From Larger Fires on the Siskiyou," *Fire
Control Notes*, 3 (July, 1939), 20-21.

^11^ Paul Linse and Larry Edwards, "Beyond 2000: will the Hotshot
Legacy Continue?" *Wildfire* 6, no. 2 (June 1997), 4.

^12^ Stewart H. Holbrook, "Forty Men and a Fire," *American Forests,*
46 (June 1940), 251-253.

^13^ Holbrook, 253.

^14^ Cliff and Anderson, 47-62.

^15^ Claire M. Renzetti and Daniel J. Curran, eds. *Women, Men, and
Society: The Sociology of Gender*

*.*(Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1989), 175-176, 198.

^16^ Roy Elliott, "The Willamette Flying 20," *Fire Control Notes*, 5
(October, 1941), 179-180.

^17^ There is no definitive answer as to which fire crew referred to
itself as a "hotshot" crew first. Stanley Stevenson, the fire control
officer of the Cleveland National Forest mentioned the El Cariso
Hotshots from the Cleveland N.F., and the Del Rosa Hotshots on the San
Bernardino N.F. Stanley Stevenson, " "Hotshot" Crews," *Fire Control
Notes*, 12 (April 1951), 29-31. As an editor's note in the preface to
a reprint of this article in *Wildfire*, the Chileo Hotshots, formed
in 1949 on the Angeles N.F., were mentioned as "the first to form as
an official hotshot crew." See Stanley Stevenson, " "Hotshot" Crews,"
reprinted in *Wildfire*, vol. 6 (June 1997), 16.

^18^ There has been quite a bit of discussion and little documentation
as to how the term "hotshot" originated. Stephen Pyne writes that
special fire fighting crews organized in CCC camps in the 1930s were
sometimes know as hotshots. In the 1940s, a number of 40-man crews
organized in Southern California were referred to as hotshot crews. In
an editor's note in *Wildfire* magazine, one more explanation is
added: "Harry Grace, a former Fire Control Officer on the Angeles
National Forest, tells how he thinks the term "hotshot" got started:
"Walt Jefferson (Jeff), about the middle of the war in 1944, (was sent
to) a fire raging on the Klamath. 'Hell of a fire.': He found
virtually no manpower available, everybody in the region was involved
at the time, so he organized these people, administrators and office
people, and called them jokingly his 'hot shots.' Harry seemed to feel
that's where the term started. Cause I know in 1946 or '47, we had a
fire in Little Rock Canyon, on the Valyermo District, and a crew came
over from the Los Padres, and they called them hot shots. That's were
\[sic\] I first heard the term. They were the only crew, as such , as
hot shots. I forget where they were based. I have a feeling it could
have been San Marcos. Called it the Sycamore Fire. []{#_bookmark12
.anchor}It was across from Sycamore campgrounds." Editor's Note to
Rolfe E. Anderson, Boyd L. Rasmussen, and Verne V. Church, "Adapting
Advanced Principles of Organization and Fire Line Construction to CCC
Suppression Crews," reprinted in *Wildfire* 6, no. 2 (June 1997), 8.

13

^19^ The Sawtooth IHC travels with eight chainsaws while the Logan IHC
travels with 10. This is more than []{#_bookmark13 .anchor}three-times
the number of chainsaws a regular fire crew handles and indicates how
much more fireline an IHC can clear. Normally, three saws are carried
into any fire assignment, requiring three sawyers and three swampers
to clear the downed vegetation.

^20^"Topic 3. Aerial Fire Control," in "Servicewide Meeting. Fire
Control, Fire Research, and Safety. Ogden, []{#_bookmark14
.anchor}Utah, 1950" (U.S. Forest Service, 1950), 8. Ralph G. Johnston,
"Helicopter Use in Forest Fire Suppression; 3 Decades," Fire
Management Notes, 39 (Fall 1978), 14-16. Stevenson, 29-30.

[]{#_bookmark15 .anchor}^21^ Martin E. Alexander, "High Mobility: The
Interregional Fire Suppression Crew," *Fire Management* 35
[]{#_bookmark16 .anchor}(Summer 1974), 15.

^22^ Ibid., pp. 14-17.

^23^ "Interregional Crew," *Fire Control Notes*, 24 (Oct. 1963), 93.

^24^ Alexander, 16.

^25^Stephen J. Pyne, "Flame and Fortune," Wildfire, 3 no. 3 (September
1994), 34. Pyne, *Fire in America,*

384\. In "Dad and I and the Forest Service," *Wildfire* 6, no. 2 (June
1997), Doug Campbell recalls some of the firefighter attire changes in
the early years of the hotshot crews. When he started with on the
Angeles []{#_bookmark17 .anchor}National Forest in 1952, he was required
to wear Levi's and a khaki long sleeved shirt and 8" top boots. In 1961
as the superintendent of the El Cariso Hotshots, Campbell recalled "Ted
Zerlak, a graduate forester...walked into camp wearing White \[sic\]
Boots and a Filson Cruiser vest. Our boots were Redwing []{#_bookmark18
.anchor}or Chippewa lace to tow and we had not one vest among us. I
think it was Ted Zrelak that started the White's Boot and Filson Cruiser
vest hotshot uniform in California," Campbell, p.24.

[]{#_bookmark19 .anchor}^26^ Pyne*, Fire in America,* 292.

^27^ Lynn Biddinson, "The Changing Role of Fire Management," *Fire
Management Notes*, (Winter 1977-78), 20.

^28^ Jerry Ewart, "Hotshot Crews Pay Big Dividends," *Fire
Management*, 37 (Winter 1976), 14-16.

^29^ Schiff, Ashley L. *Scientific Heresy in the Forest Service*
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1962).

^30^ L.T. Egging and R.J. Barney, "Fire Management: A Component of
Land Management Planning," *Environmental Management*, Vol. 3 no. 1
(1979), 15-20; see entire issue of TTFEC no. 14; Lynn R. Biddison,
"Legislative and Economic Realities: Impacts on Federal Agencies," in
Richard G. Barney, ed., *Fire Control for the 80's* (Missoula, Mont.:
Intermountain Fire Council, 1980), 34-37; Chandler, et al., 5-7. Pyne,
*Fire in America*, 291-294.

^31^ Thoele, 139-140.

^32^ Ibid., 149.

^33^ Bushman interview. Cheryl Surface-Wilcock, "Making Sandwiches and
Sweeping Rocks," *Wildfire* 6, number 2 (June 1997), 32-35.

^34^ Margaret Fuller, *Forest Fires: An Introduction to Wildland Fire
Behavior, Management, Firefighting, and Prevention*, (New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1991), 32.

^35^ Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy and Program Review.
"Answers For Public Land Users and Neighbors," 1995. In possession of
author.

^36^ Rowe Findley, "Our National Forests: Problems in Paradise,"
*National Geographic,* vol. 162, no. 3 (September 1982), 330.

^37^ U.S. Forest Service, "Hotshots"
[[http://www.fs.fed.us/fire/people/hotshots/IHC\_index.html]{.underline}](http://www.fs.fed.us/fire/people/hotshots/IHC_index.html)
(accessed September 11, 2009).

^38^ Michael G. Apicello, "FIRE 21-Fire Management in the 21^st^
Century," *Fire Management Notes* 56, No. 3 (1996), 4.

^39^ U.S. Forest Service, "Fire Policy"
[http://www.fs.fed.us/fire/policy.html.](http://www.fs.fed.us/fire/policy.html)
(accessed April 6, 2000). Cover. National IHC Steering Committee 2004
Newsletter. In possession of author.

^40^ J.L. Pierce, G.A. Meyers, and A.J.T. Jull, "Fire-induced Erosion
and Millennial-Scale Climate Change in Northern Ponderosa Pine
Forests," *Nature* vol. 432, 4 November 2004, 87-90. Thomas V. Veblen,
Thomas Kitzberger, and Joseph Donnegana, "Climatic and Human
Influences on Fire Regimes in Ponderosa Pine Forests in the Colorado
Front Range" *Ecological Applications* vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1178-1195.
P.M. Brown,

M.W. Kaye, L. Huckaby, and C. Baisan, "Fire History Along
Environmental Gradients in the Sacramento Mountains, New Mexico:
Influences of Local Patterns and Regional Processes" *Ecoscience* vol.
8, pp. 115-

126\. W.W. Covington et al., "Historical and Anticipated Changes in
Forest Ecosystems of the Inland West

[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[]{#_bookmark21 .anchor}]{#_bookmark22
.anchor}]{#_bookmark23 .anchor}]{#_bookmark24 .anchor}]{#_bookmark25
.anchor}]{#_bookmark26 .anchor}]{#_bookmark27 .anchor}]{#_bookmark28
.anchor}]{#_bookmark29 .anchor}]{#_bookmark30 .anchor}]{#_bookmark31
.anchor}]{#_bookmark32 .anchor}]{#_bookmark33 .anchor}]{#_bookmark34
.anchor}]{#_bookmark35 .anchor}]{#_bookmark36 .anchor}]{#_bookmark37
.anchor}]{#_bookmark38 .anchor}]{#_bookmark39 .anchor}]{#_bookmark40
.anchor}]{#_bookmark41 .anchor}]{#_bookmark42 .anchor}]{#_bookmark43
.anchor}]{#_bookmark44 .anchor}]{#_bookmark45 .anchor}]{#_bookmark46
.anchor}]{#_bookmark47 .anchor}14

[]{#_bookmark20 .anchor}of the United States," *Journal of Sustainable
Forestry* vol. 2, 1994, pp. 13-63. M.G. Rollins, P. Morgan, and T.
Swetnam, "Landscape-scale Controls Over 20^th^ Century Fire Occurrence
in Two Large Rocky Mountain (USA) Wilderness Areas," *Landscape
Ecology* 17, 2002, pp. 539-557.

![](media/image217.png){width="0.47088035870516187in"
height="0.5272725284339458in"}**Forest Service Washington Office 1400
Independence Avenue, SW Washington, D.C. 20250**

**File Code:** 5100 **Date:** November 9, 2021

**Route To:**

**Subject:** Ground Based Firefighting Resource Modernization --
Interagency Hotshot Crews (IHCs)

**To:** Regional Foresters

The Forest Service, and the entire interagency wildland fire
community, continues to be challenged by the year-round nature and
increasingly destructive outcomes of the modern wildland fire
'season'. Our wildland fire system was not built to sustain this level
of response activity and stretching our outdated model to meet the
increasing demand for response is having a detrimental impact on our
employees, on their physical and mental health, their opportunities
for rest and recovery, and their work-life balance.

We cannot change the entirety of the interagency wildland fire system
overnight, but the Forest Service can begin taking the first steps
towards the creation of a new wildland fire response model that
ensures we are providing a safe and effective fire response while also
taking care of and doing right by our people. The Agency has been
investing in the modernization and standardization of national
aviation resources for the past 10 years, but it is now time to shift
our focus to our ground-based suppression resources, beginning with
Type 1 hand crews, also known as Interagency Hotshot Crews (IHCs).
Across the entirety of the interagency wildland fire system, there is
no single suppression resource more heavily utilized than the Type 1
hand crew. As a result, these crews are used extensively, with fewer
opportunities to rest and recover between assignments, and they are
experiencing extreme physical and mental fatigue by the end of the
fire season.

A critical first step in addressing the challenges faced by our IHCs
is to implement a staffing standard through the conversion of
temporary to permanent positions and committing to a minimum of 18 pay
periods for all permanent seasonal crew members. In addition, all IHCs
will be provided with an approved GS-6 career ladder position
description to ensure crew members have a clear path of succession
from entry level to superintendent. Furthermore, the Agency is
financially committed to up to 25 people per crew to build more
resilience in the crews to maintain their Type 1 status, while
allowing for employees to attend to personal matters, take annual
leave, etc. We recognize infrastructure challenges may make this
difficult for some crews, thus the minimum number will remain at 20
for those who cannot move toward 25 at this time. These changes aim to
create a longer period of crew availability which will allow for
increased availability of these critical resources, create more
opportunities for rest and recovery, allow additional time for
training and professional development, and provide opportunities for
mandatory stand-down periods or other controls to establish more
deliberate work-rest ratios.

![](media/image218.jpeg){width="0.47676837270341205in"
height="0.31805555555555554in"}![](media/image219.png){width="0.22014435695538057in"
height="0.2222222222222222in"}America's Working Forests -- Caring
Every Day in Every Way Printed on Recycled Paper

Regional Foresters 2

Regions are directed to implement these changes for all IHCs to the
extent practicable in 2022. The target staffing structure as well as
instructions for reporting hiring outcomes is outlined in the
enclosure to this letter. Wildland Fire Salary & Expense allocations
will be updated for each Region to reflect these new requirements. It
is anticipated that it will take several fiscal years for all crews to
achieve this staffing standard. The Fire & Aviation Management
National Crew Coordinator will work with the IHC community to track
and report on annual progress towards achieving this standard.
Reporting requirements will begin this winter, further directions will
follow. Wildland Fire Salary & Expense allocations will be monitored
and adjusted annually as Regions make progress towards this new
standard. The point of contact for questions regarding the IHC
staffing standard may be directed to Shane Greer, National Crew
Coordinator, at (720) 315-5626.

If you have any other questions, please contact Jacob Nuttall, Acting
Director, Fire & Aviation Management, at (505) 250-1353 or
[[jacob.nuttall\@usda.gov]{.underline}.](mailto:jacob.nuttall@usda.gov)

![](media/image220.jpeg){width="3.9374409448818897in"
height="0.6953116797900263in"}

JAELITH HALL-RIVERA

Deputy Chief, State and Private Forestry

Enclosure: Interagency Hotshot Crew Staffing Standard

Regional Foresters 3

This enclosure provides additional information needed to fully
implement the direction provided in the subject letter. For any
questions related to the information below, please contact Shane
Greer, National IHC Coordinator, at (720) 315-5626.

Forest Service Interagency Hotshot Crew (IHC) Staffing Standard

-   1 - GS-9 PFT Superintendent

-   1 or 2 - GS-8 PFT Assistant Superintendent

-   2 or 3 - PFT GS-7 Squad Leaders

-   2 - PFT GS-6 Lead Firefighters

-   9 -18/8 PSE GS-5 Senior Firefighters

-   4 to 9 - GS-4 Temporary Firefighters

Forest Service Interagency Hotshot Crew (IHC) Tour Standard

-   Each crew shall be assembled for a minimum of 13 pay periods.

-   Each crew shall be available for assignment a minimum of 11 of the
    13 pay periods assembled.

![](media/image221.png)

**Topic:** Region 3, FAM Hotshot Crew (IHC) Standardization Decision

**Date:** 12/14/2021

**Contact:** Duane Tewa -- R3 FAM Assistant Director, Fire Operations

**Phone: 505-205-6214**

**Email:**
[[duane.tewa\@usda.gov]{.underline}](mailto:duane.tewa@usda.gov)

**ISSUE**

On November 9, 2021 the Washington Office issued a letter outlining
the national interagency hotshot crew staffing standards for the
Forest Service. The letter was focused on updating our outdated
wildland fire system to meet the increasing demand for response which
is impacting our employees, their physical and mental health, their
opportunities for rest and recovery, and their work-life balance. The
letter directs each region to implement a staffing standard through
the conversion of temporary to permanent positions and committing to a
minimum of 18 pay periods for all permanent seasonal crew members. In
addition, all IHCs will be provided with an approved GS-6 career
ladder position description to ensure crew members have a clear path
of succession from entry level to superintendent. Furthermore, the
Agency is financially committed to up to 25 people per crew to build
more resilience in the crews to maintain their Type 1 status, while
allowing for employees to attend to personal matters, take annual
leave, etc.

The Washington Office letter does not align with current Region 3
standards for IHC's. On December 7, 2021, the Acting Director for
Region 3 Fire and Aviation Management made a decision for how the
region will move toward the new standards.

**Implementation**

The crew configuration standard will be:

-   1 GS-09 PFT Superintendent

-   2 GS-08 PFT Assistant Superintendents

-   3 GS-07 PFT Squad Leaders

-   3 GS-06 PFT Lead Firefighters

-   7 GS-05 18/8 Senior Firefighters

-   7 GS-04 Temporary Firefighters

Total crew numbers will be 23. Each crew shall be assembled for a
minimum of 13 pay periods. Each crew shall be available for assignment
a minimum of 11 of the 13 pay periods assembled.

It is recognized it will take time to reach these aspirational
numbers. The process will begin by adjusting length of tours to
reflect the above organizational structure. Hiring for new positions
(i.e. GS-08 PFT Assistant Superintendent or GS-06 PFT Lead
Firefighters) will begin during the fall FY23 Southwestern Regional
Fire Hire Event. Crews are encouraged to utilize detailers during the
2022 fire season to test the structure.

![](media/image221.png)

As part of the decision the region will evaluate the length of tours
for non-hotshot crew modules. The intent will be to convert additional
non-hotshot crew modules to more permanent status with longer defined
tours of service.

The region will evaluate when hotshot crews come on and go out of
service each year. The intent will be to stagger crews to better cover
the southwestern fire season. A more deliberate approach will be made
to utilize regional crews for within region assignments and minimize
out of GACC crews early in the season.

The region will evaluate the need and ability to have a mandatory
stand down period for all hotshot crews to ensure crews are receiving
the rest needed during the fire season.

**Rational for Decision**

The rational for moving to a 1-2-3-3 structure with more PFT's and a
23-person organization is to provide more mid-level management with
flexibility to rotate crew members as needed. The intent is to allow
more flexibility of the crew to:

-   Improve training opportunities

-   Provide more depth in leadership at the GS 06, 07 and 08 levels

-   Increase the opportunities to allow crew members to tend to personal
    matters during the fire season without effecting the crews type 1
    status

It is recognized the new model with 2 Assistant Superintendents will
force a change in our management strategies, but I believe the hotshot
community is resilient and the leadership of these hotshot
organizations will be able to adjust and adapt to this change. We want
to push Region 3 to test these new standards to determine if these
decisions are the "right" decisions to improve the working environment
for our hotshot organizations while capitalizing on the opportunity to
modernize the wildland fire system to meet the growing demands on our
fire resources.

## Interviews

**Leaders We Would Like to Meet Ben Charley January 24, 2004**

**by Jim Cook and Angela Tom**

![](media/image222.jpeg){width="2.999998906386702in" height="2.75in"}

**Ben Charley and three of his sons on a fire in 1983 (left to right -
Shelby, Dirk, Ben, and Rocco)**

Ben Charley is unique among fire leaders. He may be the oldest Hotshot
Crew Superintendent on record...he retired in that position at the age
of 61 with 23 years of service with the U.S. Forest Service. Prior to
that, he spent 20 years with the U.S. Marine Corps, retiring as a
Gunnery Sergeant. Ben is also a tribal elder in the Mono Indian Tribe.
And if that is not enough, Ben Charley has sons and grandsons who
followed him into the military and into the wildland fire service.
When we interviewed Ben, he didn't want to talk about himself, only
about the questions we had regarding leadership. Later, he relented
and provided the following first person biography to his son Shelby
Charley and long-time co-worker Bob Bennett:

"I was born and raised in the small community of Dunlap, California in
the southern Sierra Nevada Mountains. My parents were American Indians
from the Mono tribe. The town of Dunlap, at my childhood was about
half Indians and half non-Indians. All of us were poor economically,
but we grew up together. When I was 4 years old, I was placed in an
Indian boarding school for approximately 2 years; I lost my fluency
with the Mono language, although I can still understand and speak the
Mono language. I went to Dunlap Elementary School with about 15 other
kids, now the student population has grown to over 600 students. In
1940, I started attending Reedley High school, and then joined the
U.S. Marine Corps in February, 1943."

"I went to boot camp at the Marine Corps Recruit Depot in San Diego,
California; then on to an Infantry Training Regiment at Camp Elliot in
Miramar, California; then to Rifle Range Camp Mathews in Torrey Pines,
California. After training, I went aboard the ship USS Sea Ray, with
the 3 rd Marine Division. We shipped out for the South Pacific --
stopping in Bouganville, the Solomon Islands, Okinawa, and Guam. The
war ended and I came home, the ship docked at San Francisco

late in 1945. After leave, I shipped out to Eagle Mountain Lake, near
Fort Worth, Texas. This was a base for gliders. I did not want to fly
in a glider, I lucked out...the base was disbanded, and I was promoted
to Corporal. I reported to Camp Pendleton in California as a
Rifleman."

"In October 1949, I was sent to Korea, went ashore at Wonsan, up to
Koto-ri, in the north, almost to Chosin Reservoir, then turned around
and went the other way back down the road. This was in November and it
was very cold! Then we went to Hung Nam in North Korea, by way of an
LST (landing ship transport), hard ride, especially through a typhoon.
From Hung Nam we went to Massan in South Korea. After required R&R, we
started back up again. The Commandant of the Marine Corps said no
Marine will spend two Christmas' in Korea, so I came back home on
December 21, 1950."

"After Korea, I was stationed at Marine Corps Air Station, El Toro,
California with Motor Transport, at the rank of Sergeant. Next, I went
to Japan and Okinawa with the 3 rd Marine Division. Then I returned
state side, for cold weather training at Bridgeport, California. My
next duty station was the Marine Corps Air Facility at Irvine,
California. It was originally used as a blimp base, but I was assigned
there to the 1 st Marine Corps Air Wing working with helicopters."

"I retired as a Gunnery Sergeant, with 20 years of military service.
During my time spent in the military, I met and worked with a lot of
senior Non-Commissioned Officers (NCOs). These were good leaders, all
were combat veterans...I learned a lot from them."

"I returned home to Dunlap and later began working with the U.S.
Forest Service in 1966. I started working with the Hume Lake District
of the Sequoia National Forest in a Recreation job. I then moved to a
Fire Prevention job and then to an Engine Foreman job."

"In 1974, the Horseshoe Meadow Handcrew was established and I was
assigned to run the crew. The crew was stationed at an old CCC site
and that had also been a logging camp. In the beginning, the crew was
25 persons for seven day coverage. The program started with
crewmembers as temporary Forest Service personnel. However, in 1976
funding was cut and to keep the crew going I started recruiting with
various Human Resource Agencies, such as California Indian Manpower
Consortium (CIMC), Youth Conservation Corps (YCC), and with various
Indian Reservations to keep the crew staffing up and operational. The
employees we hired stayed with the crew for one fire season to get
training and experience. Then we tried to place them as temporaries
within the Forest Service hiring system. I recruited American Indians
throughout the western states. During the late 1970s the crew size was
reduced to 20 persons. The crew received Hotshot status in 1980.
Through most of this time, Bob Bennett was my Foreman. Sometimes, the
only non-Indian on the crew, he had some rough times, but he toughed
it out and is still there as the current Superintendent. He's the 2nd
Superintendent since we started."

"I received an award from the Department of Agriculture, U.S. Forest
Service for the Supervisor of the year in 1988 and traveled to
Washington D.C. to receive the honors.

I was also awarded in 1988 from the California Indian Manpower
Consortium for outstanding supervisor of the year, voting was by all
Indian programs in United States. I traveled to Pensacola,

Florida for that presentation."

"After retirement from the Forest Service, I drove fire crew vehicles
for the Special Operations Company and for the California Department
of Forestry until 2002. I'm completely retired since, well, not
completely; I'm currently the elected Tribal Chairman for the Dunlap
Band of Mono Indians. Life has treated me good during these 43 years
in Public Service."

![](media/image223.jpeg){width="1.9026859142607173in"
height="2.2968744531933507in"}

**Ben Charley on a lightning fire right before his retirement**

**Cook / Tom:** You know a lot of people have followed you in a lot of
different environments, as Chairman of the Mono Indian Tribe, as a
Marine Corps Sergeant, and as a Hotshot Superintendent. What makes you
want to follow somebody else?

**Ben Charley:** What makes me want to follow somebody else...well,
when I first came to the Forest Service, Bill Sandborg kind of showed
me the ropes. Billy was the kind of guy who if you done a good job he
would let you know, and if you do a crappy job he would let you know.
He is a guy that is hard to know. He was a good friend. When I came
out of the Marine Corps, I didn't know anything about fire, and I
already had twenty years in the military. A lot of times I was lucky
to be put in with Bill. I learned a lot from him.

**Cook / Tom:** Going back when you were Gunnery Sergeant or
Superintendent, what did you look for in those people that you
respected?

**Ben Charley:** Well, you see guys like Chesty Puller, I knew Puller.
I served for a couple of officers when I first went into the Marine
Corps, the way they acted and the way they talked, just their manner,
something that told you this is the guy you want to follow. I tried to
do the same when I became a Hotshot. I never would lead guys down into
a hole unless it was safe, I would go down there first to see what it
was doing, and then I come back and we all go back down together. I
believe in that. Too many people sit in their vehicle. I got promoted
to Sector Boss on a fire, by a guy named Bill Bowmen. He says "You've
been leader of crews now for quite a while and I like how you do
business. Right now I am making you one of my Sector Bosses." He is
another guy I looked up to, just his mannerisms, just the way he
talks. A lot of people will come up and tell you something and leave.
He wouldn't, he would explain things to you and ask if you
understand...that

old feedback stuff.

**Cook / Tom:** Do you think leaders are born or made?

**Ben Charley:** Both, if you have the aptitude and want to do it, you
can do it. You can be a leader, anybody can. A few are just born to
it. They just stand out, you have an intuition about those guys.

**Cook / Tom:** I know the Marine Corps believes strongly that certain
individual traits are the basis for good leadership. What one or two
characteristics of a leader are most important to you?

**Ben Charley:** I think the first thing is you have to have respect
for your people. Don't be telling them things that you can't fulfill.
You want your guys to know you and respect you. They have to respect
you, don't do or promise anything you can't back up.

**Cook / Tom:** If you were to look back at your whole life, what do
you think was the key influence that helped you become a leader?

**Ben Charley:** Well, you know my Dad was a kind of a visionary. He
was a guy that knew what he wanted. That is what made my family, kind
of an outcast. The other Indians would say, you think you are too good
for us. He would grow things. We had peach trees here, we sold
peaches, we had potatoes and peanuts. He would do things. We grew hay,
we would bail hay, we would sell it. This land here was completely
covered in Oak trees, and I remember we used to come down and blast
and burn and dig them out of the ground. We had to work, we learned
how to work. There were three of us kids and he worked us hard.

**Cook / Tom:** The older you get the more willing you are to look at
yourself, what do you consider your biggest strengths and weaknesses?

**Ben Charley:** I think my biggest strength is treat your people like
you want to be treated. Sure I would work them hard, but they would
come through. After a hard assignment I'd say "Okay I will buy you
guys ice cream." I bought them ice cream. A reward, you work for me I
will treat you good.

**Cook / Tom:** The harder question is what do you consider your
weaknesses?

**Ben Charley:** I guess it is being too compassionate sometimes, that
will ruin you. Some of these guys will pick up on that. I do have a
lot of feelings for people. If they have hard times, I will do what I
can to help them. They will burn you sometimes. You have to have some
compassion, but you have to control that.

**Cook / Tom:** Since you started in 1966 what do you think are the
biggest improvements in firefighting?

**Ben Charley:** Safety has improved a lot. In the old days, they
would say shut up and go out and do your job. The mechanized equipment
and other new stuff is a good thing. You will not get lost anymore,
you have GPS, and that is pretty accurate. Safety has come a long ways
though, and that

is the best change.

**Cook / Tom:** How about some of the changes that have not been so
good?

**Ben Charley:** I don't know, when I started out in fire, you walked
your piece of line at least three times during your shift. I believe
in that very strongly. You don't go to leave until your relief comes
on, you tell them about all the problems and you really know what you
are talking about.

**Cook / Tom:** Yesterday we were at a training session a bunch of
young squad bosses. If you had an opportunity to stand in front of
that class and talk to them what two or three lesson might you give?

**Ben Charley:** I have always tried to keep my kids informed, so that
they know what is going on. I come from briefing, and before we hit
the line, I say this is what we are looking at, so they know. I think
if you keep your kids informed they will really want to follow you.

Also, see what you got. Really go out and look at the fire and figure
out all the stuff that you have available to use. Think about what you
are going to do, before you start doing it. Then you have to be out
there with them, leading from out front.

And last thing, don't be ashamed of making mistakes, everybody does
it. I have made a lot of mistakes. Yeah, it makes you feel crappy, but
what is done is done. Learn from it. A lot of things happen on a fire
that you can't do a thing about.

**Cook / Tom:** If there was one thing that you would hope the
firefighters that have worked for you would take away from their time
with Ben Charley, what would you want your legacy to be?

**Ben Charley:** I always taught my guys to do what is right all the
time. It is a good feeling to see guys that have worked for me move up
in the system to higher positions than me. I hope that lesson was part
of their success.

![](media/image224.jpeg){width="1.4999989063867016in"
height="1.2513867016622922in"}*This interview with Ben Charley was
conducted by Jim Cook and Angela Tom in Dunlap, California on January
24, 2004.*

**LEADERSHIP TOOLBOX REFERENCE**

**Leaders We Would Like to Meet January 2004**

**Interview**: Chuck Wolfe **Crew:** Wenachee Bushmen **Date:**
unknown

I started with the crew in 1963 and went with them until 68, spring of
'68. I went on to the FMO job on the Lake Wenachee RD

Where based?

Right here in Entiat, the barracks were leased around for several
years.

They were either apartment quarters or they were in, we leased one
growers kitchen and housing. A hotel kind of thing.

Fitzmocker's Cabin?

That was in '63, when we first started. It was right in town.

Chevy flatbeds?

Yes, with crummies on them.

Background of the word; crummie?

Crummies come from loggers in Washington and Oregon and northern
California. I think Weyehauser crews were the first ones to call them
that.

The reason they were called crummies, they were essentially crummy. A
crummy piece of equipment in crummy condition.

They were crew haulers, those were line units; crews that went out.
Anywhere from four to ten people in them. They traveled quite a ways
out in the woods. A lot of the stuff was off road so you didn't ever
see them.

The Forest Service was into using crummies quite a bit. We weren't the
first in Region Six They called them inter regional crew.

Mt.Hood's older than us, Deschutes are older than us. On the Siskyou
there was a crew.

The Mt Hood IR crew, the Roadrunners; which was Redmond. And the
Rogue-that's the Siskyou crew. All those were out of Oregon. The
Entiat crew was the only one out of Washington, up until Mt.Baker crew
came in. That's the only two IR crews in the state. They're on both
sides of the Cascade range.

Uniforms?

I think the second year we go the orange shirts. The original orange
shirts which was a fire resistant shirt. A 3M was used. If the fire
was pushed through the threads, it would go out. Smolder and go out.

The original symbol for the Bushmen was a single pine tree with a
diagonal inscription "bushmen" on it.

Name?

That name I picked myself for the crew. Before that it was an inter
forest crew called "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs". It was a pretty
good crew, it was run by Doug Bowie. It was made up of local kids; out
of high school and in college. They were a pretty good unit. No
disrespect. They went on some tough fires and did a damn good job.
They kind of, in a nostalgic way, named themselves Snow White and the
Seven Dwarfs because there was only eight of them. That was crew size
in those days. Eight was the crew size. Why they picked that, I'm not
sure. I think it's based upon the linear supervision principle of a
foreman. A crew boss, two squad leaders and then five crewmen.

We selected the bushmen from the fact that, we'd taken the name from,
the wording both from Australia and from South Africa. They were
pretty fierce people with a lot of independence, a lot of durability.
That's why we chose the bushmen, in honor of those people. We were
pretty self-reliant ourselves.

Do with what you had, get the job done. Then think about coming home.
Training?

We mostly trained right there on the ground. We went to classroom.
There was about, out of a ten day period; four days of that was fire
behavior. Fairly extensive, it would probably equal what they call the
390 now. Plus a lot of other stuff: weather, as far as the 10 standard
firefighting orders and 10 situations that shout watchout. At that
time we only had ten. I don't remember when we picked up twelve, then
we went to sixteen. I think they're 16 now.

Ten days of extensive classroom. About half the day was that, about
half the day was out actually digging line on proposed burn units or
just digging along ridgelines in case there was fire in that area
they'd have something to go to, be able to go to it quickly.

The FMO on the district, called the Fire Control Officer, he was the
primary appointee at that time, of the people that made applications
directly to the district.

The ones that showed the best potential for doing that. There was kind
of a need for people to enter, that are new and so on. And bring them
along. That was excellent money for their furthering their education.
They'd go to college from there and we'd pick up high school people.
Coming out of people, mainly out of the local region, local area.

Cause they had applied directly to the district. After a while it went
through the forest and then. All we had all hiring practices changed.
Then the affirmative action propaganda came in and everything else. We
proceeded a lot of them, ahead of time.

In fact, our first two. We had congressional appointments too.
Appointees choose. We had a pretty good cadre, most of those people
that were on those crews are leaders of today.

How much was the hourly wage?

Not a hell of a lot but it was a lot more than anybody else was
getting.

How much OT?

Probably averaged 10, 10 hours a week up until the pit of the fire
season, which started around, really the tough part started around the
20th of July and went around the 15th of September. There we could
rack up some pretty long hours. It wasn't uncommon to be out for a
full 24 hours, two days at a time.

Just picking people off the line, putting lookouts by 'em and letting
them catch an hour of sleep. By squads, did that a few times. Done
that a few times, didn't like doing it but we did it. Pick a good safe
place to do it. Had sector bosses in concurrence with it.

They went off the payroll at that time. The time would stretch over a
quiet morning and be over by ten o'clock. It would be different squads
would go off at different times. Sack out off along the line. Have a
guard with them.

What size crews?

First year was 15, the following year we went to twenty-five. Went to
twenty-five until 1966, I believe it was. They reduced up back to
twenty because of the concern over the DC-3 loading. That's mainly how
we traveled.

Where you guys went?

We went to California, Oregon, Washington, Idaho, Montana. Northern
Wyoming and southeastern Montana.

When we stepped on the scene there was a lot of expectation in our
work. And we had to hold up to it.

Pickup crews for main manpower?

Yes, most of those people weren't used in active fire lines. They used
a lot of them before that time and they found that crews were not very
productive. They picked them up right off the street and brought them
by bus right to the fireline. Hell, I've seen before I took over this
crew and while I was running the Bushmen, there were people out there,
literally, with no shoes on. They'd buy 'em boots and put them up on
the mountain then they'd crawl on all fours to get back off. Got their
wine jugs and canned heat taken away from them and it made 'em see big
monsters. Sometimes it could be a chore just getting them all herded
out of there.

More trouble than they were worth?

Yeah, that's true and that's what really evolved these crews into
elite units. When we were first started working with the IR crews they
were looking more at organized units to take over sections of fire.
When we got there, we stayed there until it was out. Or we were moved
off to a hotter unit, multi fire starts.

Fire camps were smaller, less manpower?

I don't know if they were smaller then or not. They used loggers much
more than they do today. You could come across a 50 man Weyrhauser
crew in some places. Particularly when you get over on the Olympic or
on the west side of the Cascades. In Oregon, it wasn't uncommon to see
those size crews. They were trained loggers, they're loggers and

they were trained to fight fires. They could build line, they weren't
exactly as speedy as we were.

The lumber companies supplied manpower?

Yeah, it was on a payroll situation. They were second line protection.
They would provide crews in there when things turned dry and bad. I
have an awful log of respect for logging units. I've seen them bust
their butts right along with us.

Most loggers didn't feel they made much money when they fought fires,
they weren't in favor of that. They made better money out there
logging. They did the work.

Tools?

Starting with, we only carried about two chainsaws. One mainline and
one backup. That was back in the days of the old Mac 10s, the old
Homelite Zips and stuff.

The crews; they were really held to pulaskis and adz hoes and shovels.
Their main working tools and still is.

You see other inventions coming down the line. We were the original
ones to carry the waist belts. Got that idea from the military and
made it to fit us. We had the smokejumpers at NCSB (North Cascades
Smokejumper Base) make up versions for the crew. We used those for two
years, things just evolved.

Describe that stuff?

Now, they're pretty much standard equipment for the crews. The waist
belt carried their water, their hand tools, extra gloves, meal of the
day, their coat. Whatever.

These were the predecessors of the modern line pack like Eagle Gear?
You bet! That's what they call them now; line packs.

They evolved from PG bags?

No, they came from actually the IR crews trying to come up with
something they could carry their stuff and still stay on the move. The
smokejumpers helped build them because they had the sewing machines
and the heavy canvas and lanyards that was needed to make them up.

Filson vest?

Mostly the squad leaders and foremen. That was too much heavy material
around the linemen. Hell, they needed to breathe; they were soaking
wet every day. All of us were, had to keep some air flowing around
people's bodies to keep them from having heatstroke. Really the crews
had to have loose arms, nothing to weight them down because they had
to swing tools and carry on.

Put all the weight down on the legs where the legs got the power to
carry it. The back was relieved of that extra weight swinging around
up there.

Blue jeans, orange shirts, tin hard hats and Whites? Them Whites'
boots are synonymous with firefighting.

Otto White.

He actually changed, I don't how. I think he more or less locked on
that need well in advance of line crews and stuff. He had a design
called a jumper/logger which is now used. That's more or less elite
style footwear. It spread to Kerns, Nick's, Marconi, Bone Dry came out
with one. Danner came out with one. So it's kind of spread out. Nick's
and Whites are pretty much the elite of the boots.

Career?

AFCO in spring of '68, in the spring of '69 I moved to Wenachee as the
assistant fire dispatcher. The following year I moved to the Cle Ellum
RD as the fire management officer. Five years later I moved back to
Entiat as the fire management officer here. In '90 I retired.

Tyee & Rat Creek vs Wenachee fires?

I don't know because in seventy I had my own problems on the Cle Ellum
RD and those were beau-coup little fires up in the crags of the
Cascades. That were persistent in burning and back then they didn't
have any kind of prescribed fire policies so we were working on that,
trying to get personnel and all the personnel was being pulled away. I
had to stay home take care of my own back yard.

I think back in the seventies the management of those camps was a
little bit better because it was more remote. Handled more remotely.
It wasn't a desire to try and move them close in on the towns. The
impact to the community wasn't as much as during the Tyee fires.

Another thing, in 88 when the Hickleman Ridge fire came along. The
Hickleman Fire was in need of additional crews and there just wasn't
any. They had to scrounge up as many as they could. A lot of state
personnel to try and make up the shortcomings.

Because of those large fires, I think Hickleman got a head start, that
was a man caused fire that had probably the better part of a day
burning conditions running free on a very steep slope. The only thing
that held it down was the inversion and lack of active sunlight on the
slope. Once it got cooking and it come up that slope there was no
stopping it. That was a freight train on the wild loose. Just like the
Entiat did, created a fire storm and it was on its way. Followed the
terrain and it was on it's way.

Rogue rivalry?

I don't know where that comes from. I think that's more story than
true.

I didn't feel that there was a conflict there other than the fact that
maybe; jovial competition. I know that the foreman of the other crew
was kind of a loose cannon kind of guy but I could tolerate that. That
wasn't a problem. That's probably where the stories come from.

A reputation for being non conformists

That's a good way of putting it. They were hard working boogers.

Just plain fact, you get an IR crew in and there was work to do, and
did it's work. There wasn't anything asked. Probably the crews asked
to be left out on the line and be serviced there. That's where the
thing of the coyote camps started coming in. They

started recognizing all that transportation time was just burning the
people out. Better to spike them out there in a safe place and keep
them out there on the fire. It was more manageable.

I know when I took a team down to northern California in '89 that was
so successful for us, we figured we saved eight days coming out. We
were in the Shasta Trinity mountains. Pretty tough terrain to get
anybody around, including helicopters.

How long did you keep the IR name? We became Entiat Hotshots.

I think that was '83 or '84. About the same time Sonny O'Neil started
working. A lot of people took poor reviews for that name and the
reputation it carried. The crew really in those years didn't conduct
themselves in a very rewarding manner. They were roughriders. They did
their job but kind of left a tarnished reputation. That hurt them.

See, you've got men in there instead of women and men. So you've got a
gender thing in there.

Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs; that was a good crew. I remember them
on Forest Mountain. They did some good work.

Corn started in '65.

David Stanoway when the crew started up. Kay Johnson, had run
smokejumper base and loft foreman. Came here after Stanoway. Kay is in
BLM in Alaska, retired up there.

**Interview**: Don Biedebach

**Crew:** Chilao

**Date:** 4/17/92

There was a crew in '48, tried to call themselves hot shots.

Built the camp in '49. I had been sent to a station called High
Summit, which is now Mill Creek. It was down on the Forest Highway.
That was a new station, they were just building that. I opened that up
and I was offered the Hotshot crew job. So I moved up to Chilao.

It was July 2nd, 1949. I recall getting about 30 men and here's the
July 4th period coming up. It was almost inevitable that we would get
some kind of call. I put them through a torrid training session. None
of them had had any experience. I crammed everything I could into 2
days to get them as ready as possible. We lasted then until sometime
in October.

30 man crews:

It didn't seem to make alot of difference. I averaged between 25 and
30 for the season. Some would go and some would come.

I got out of high school, I found I was having to compete with men 40
years of age with families for 15 dollar a week jobs. It seemed to be
an out for me and I liked it. It was July 24th I was inducted. I wound
up at Lake Hughes, in the Lancaster-Palmdale area. Two day later, they
emptied the camp and moved us to a fire on the upper Arroyo Seco; The
Brown Mountain Fire. I sorta took a liking to fire control. I was on
the fire suppression crew. I stated in the CCs for 3 years. I had to
get 2 extensions. From there it was just sort of an automatic drop
into the Forest Service. My first 3 years was in a fire lookout tower.

There was a breakup in 1941. I was inducted into the Army. You only
went in for a year and then you got out. The Japanese seemed to have a
little different idea about that come December 7th. I got out in '45.
Tail end of '45 and they put me on the Buckhorn Patrol. Just about 10
miles up the road from Chilao. Real beautiful country. I was a patrol
on a segment of a ranger district.

After that I got sucked in at Vallyermo Ranger Station and I was there
for 25 years. 27 years come to think about it. With just the one break
and this all happened in the year of 1949. I went to the High Summit
station and then to the Chilao Hot Shots. At the end of the season, I
managed to get back to Valyermo and I stayed there, I didn't want
anymore of the hot shots.

I was 34 years old at the time and I recognized very quickly that
that's a young man's job to stay with. You know every year, you get a
year older but the kids don't. I realized that when you're a hot shot
crew and soon as you roll into a fire camp, they're pointing at the
tallest mountain and the deepest gulch. You know. Which is
understandable because they're trained men, supposed to be good
efficient crews. That part I accepted. Just to keep at it, on a steady
basis, I've known a couple who have done that, it just beat 'em

down. Course I had already had my share of hiking and so forth thought
New Guinea and the rest of the South Pacific. I had used my legs quite
a little bit over the years. Which I'm paying for now, I think.

1949\. Actually was the first year they became an organized crew and were
called the Hotshots.

Very little has changed (in fire fighting). From the time I started in
the CCCs, it was entirely a hand tool show.

Tractors.

Aviation moved in, we incorporated that. When I was at Chilao in '49,
was when we first really got started on heli-jumping. From
helicopters. Fact I made a film on jumping from the helicopter. The
old copters, you didn't have a bubble in front, just open cockpit.
They didn't have skids, they had wheels. Try to jump off a wheel, it
wasn't easy. It kind of died then. Well, somebody got hurt. Jumping
and all of a sudden, that was the old way of doing things. Don't go
into a training phase to try and correct a problem. Let's just knock
the problem off. They banned heli-jumping for about 2 or 3 years.
Somebody came along and pounded at it and finally got it back in but
they had to wear all kinds of equipment and everything.

I was involved in copters over the years...Saigon. Fire crew foreman
at Valyermo.

Engine & crew.

Fire behavior studies and lecturing.

'73 Little Tjunga Training Center. Set up.

Ron Smith: Good Heavens! He's one guy I was referring to that stayed
with it. That guy is a rock. He could stay with it.

Ray Bond from Los Padres took over in 1950 to '53. 2 years was prison
inmates.

Agua Dulce retired. Bill Myreck was super. Think he was.

Hot Shot Name Origin.

Harry Grace, Angeles FCO, story: Walt Jefferson, "Jeff", about middle
of the war,'44, there was a fire raging on the Klamath. "Hell of a
fire." He found virtually no manpower available, everybody in the
region was involved at the time, so he organized these people,
administrators and office people, and called them jokingly his "hot
shots". Harry seemed to feel that's where the term started. Cause I
know in 1947,' 46, we had a fire in Little Rock Canyon, on the
Valyermo District, and a crew came over from the Los Padres, and

they called them Hotshots. That's where I first heard the term. They
were the only crew, as such, as hot shots. I forget where they were
based. I have a feeling it could have been San Marcos.

Called it the Sycamore Fire. It was across from Sycamore campgrounds.
I thought it was pretty much a California term, Region 5 term.

Native Americans:

Indian school in Riverside: Sherman Institute

Pete Trujillo, killed in wreck on crest highway, Chilao foreman. Ralph
Johnston, Boise, Idaho 83705

Fish fork ridge 1950 lighting fire, number, no name of fire Blue Ridge
above Big Pine.

I finally learned this much: We put the fire out when it's ready to be
put out.

There will come a time when all the influencing circumstances begin to
lay down, or enough of them begin to lay down and the fire responds
accordingly. Then it's time to move in. I can recall times when we've
knocked our crews out, by the time that fire laid down, was ready to
be put out, our crews were so beat, they could barely get in and do
the job. I changed my feelings about how aggressive you should be. You
got a small fire, get in and beat the heck out of it right away. Once
it gets involved and get moving, there's not too much of a point in
exposing yourself unless you have to protect life and property.

**Interview**: Doug Campbell

**Crew:** El Cariso

**Date**: unknown

I was the El Cariso Hot Shot Superintendent during the years of 1961 &
1962.

We were reorganizing the crew and decided on 2 - 15 man crews with a
crew foreman for each crew. This made the crew number 32.

Del Rosa and El Cariso Hot Shots had a DC-2 stationed at Ontario
airport for our crews and one of the crewmembers said during the war
it was called the ruptured duck. The crew did not have a mascot, and
in one of the crew meetings it was decided that the concept of the
Ruptured Duck would be our logo.

My wife was a good artist and produced the drawing of the mascot. The
injury to the mascot was the crew\'s idea. What it represented was
toughness.

For those who care the duck was sexless and not representative of any
sex, race or anything else, just an old mascot from the war reused. I
never thought it would last this long. But there was no great thought
put into it. Patty Campbell got direction to make it like daffy duck
with a splint, a blister and using a crutch. We reproduced the duck on
hardhats, vests and on the basketball backboard. I can still see Mike
Alaga painting it on the backboard in camp.

The crew cut 28 miles of hot line in 1962 and made me very proud of
their work. We had injuries but none serious these years. These years
of working with the men on the crew were the best of my 30 years in
the Forest Service.

**Interview**: Joe Tsabetsaye

**Crew:** Chilao

**Date**: 10/25/95

I came out here to CA in September of 1958, here to fight lightning
strike fires. Had you been a firefighter before?

I used to fight fires with organized crews out of Zuni Pueblo.

I think the Zunis were the very first to start fighting fires in the
New Mexico area. We went down to Arizona and before you know it, they
start coming out here to California. The Forest Service called for us.
A Liason Officer that comes out of Albuquerque or Grants, New Mexico
area would bring us out here.

Come over for the season specifically recruited?

No, I just, I was involved in a, I was in a Zuni organized fire
fighting crew.

Like the Navajo tribe, I think if they did it, then, when they were
recruiting a hotshot crew they used to go to Riverside Indian School
and they used to recruit some of the Navajo kids out of that indian
school.

The Zuni organized fire fighting crews were really actually originated
right in Zuni Pueblo. It was sort of, it was sort of organized by the
Forest Service and the Governor of the Zuni Tribe. Which he was my
grandfather, Conrad Masaywee(sp).

At first he used to travel with them, when they flew up to Wyoming and
all those places he used to fly with them. And out here for a while.

Came over with a tribal crew, how to get hooked up with hotshots?

When I came out here with the crew in September of 1958, it was an
organized crew out of Zuni Pueblo. Then, I was involved in this
lightning strike fires here on the Angeles and one of the, at that
time they used to call them Fire Control Officers, one of the Fire
Control Officers, Assistant Fire Control Officer. He was pretty well,
he was pretty well aware of the Zuni organized crew. He was interested
in recruiting Zunis. He was talking to me, he asked me if I would be
interested in joining the hotshot crew. So I told him ; "if there's a
chance. If there's an opening. Yeah". So he talked with our crew
leader and the first time they came out of the bus, an arrangement was
made and said ok. They took me down. They took my physical and they
took me up to Chilao, that's where I started.

How long at Chilao?

Probably about six or seven years. Then I was on Oak Grove too. Oak
Grove Inter Regional Hotshots. They used to go all over the region.

Dalton & Texas Canyon all Zuni?

I think about 1955 and 57. There was Zuni crews over at Texas Canyon.
They more or less came up like I did. The organized crews, organized
down in Zuni, they brought them out here to fight fires and the whole
crew decided to take on a job here and they were hired. They were
picked up as a whole crew. But in my case, I was just more or less, I
came out here on an individual basis. All I had was a fire pack and
when I stepped off the line, when I was given permission. That's what
I did.

30 man crew?

Up at Chilao we used to have twenty man crews. Twenty Five with the
crew pusher and saw bosses. Two twenty fire man crews.

Both Chilao Hotshots?

They were all Chilao Hotshots there.

How has fire fighting changed, what type of gear?

They got a lot of modern equipment. We used to just carry, for the
water we used to always carry two military canteens and those two
gallon canteens in a backpack. You can't be confined to two canteens,
I had a couple canteens you know. One of my uncles was in the
military, he brought those back home. I had those and they used to
issue us those two round, two gallon canteens.

No safety gear. Orange shirts?

What we used to wear were khaki shirts. Khaki shirts and blue jeans.
No nomex, no fire shelters.

Used to live up at Chilao?

We had barracks up there where we stayed. They used to have a cook up
there, used to cook meals and everything. We didn't get paid like the
hotshots do nowadays. There was really no such thing as the overtime
cause you were required to stay at the camp like from six in the
morning til ?. Where would you go at six in the morning? You lived
there so you had to stay there, at the camp. You had to wear your
boots until ten o'clock at night. You actually work out in the field.
You work out in the field eight hours and after like five o'clock, you
still got to be ready to go to a fire until ten o'clock at night. You
can't leave the camp or nothing. For twenty five per cent of your
salary, which amounts to about twenty five cents an hour at that time.

You were getting a dollar an hour?

Yeah, then if you, after ten o'clock; if you worked to midnight. Then
you get straight pay, that's from one o'clock to eight o'clock in the
morning. Then you get your regular eight hours in. So there's really
no chance of getting any kind of overtime.

No such a thing as a time and a half.

Who ran Chilao?

When I started up there, a person name of Woody Hite was
superintendent, he passed away about a year ago.

I worked under him and I worked under another man who comes from Taos
Pueblo. His name was Pete Trujillo.

The majority of people when I started up there, was hispanic. Spanish.
Speak spanish, people from like Taos and Santa Fe area. They had a
bunch of those people up there. When I came down to Oak Grove, it was
mostly Navajo that come from Riverside Indian School.

Went to Oak Grove in '64?

It was basically the same. Everything was the same. There was nothing
different. They were the Angeles Arroyo Seco District hotshot crew.

Oak Grove, I think we had 40. Two hotshot crews, then we had an
engine. The same work, the same work ethic. The rules, all the same.

Who ran Oak Grove?

The superintendent was Ken David.

Pete Trujillo passed away. Most are retired.

The work environment was real different than the way it's set up now.
As far as the environment, I can't see any difference. Actually it's a
heck of a lot easier than our days were. They have it easier now days.
They can fly them up to the places we used to hike in to and stuff.

No helicopters, no water drops. When you had to hike into a fire,
sometimes you had to stay there, go without maybe food and water for
thirty some hours. A lot of guys, a lot of people used to drop out.
Just walk off and don't want to stay around.

Stakebed trucks?

We used to have some open trucks that seated men in back. A lot of
times, we used to throw a canvas over it like a covered wagon.

We didn't have no fuel breaks here like now days, they got fuel breaks
to where they can anchor their line in to and from. There's always a,
there's just always a big place where you can, in those days, it would
be a rock outcrop or something, that's where you tied you line off. Or
where you had to tie in to. Everything was so primitive then. They
didn't have no bulldozers, they got bulldozers but they were cable
dozers and they weren't well versed like the new machinery we got now
days.

Cable dozers?

You couldn't, they can't cut into a mineral soil like a hydraulic
blade can. You just go by the weight of it, the weight of it was just
scratching the soil.

Even at that, you don't hardly see any bulldozers.

Build the fuel breaks as project work?

Yeah, right. The fuel breaks, the work didn't actually come around
until, probably around '60. They used to call it pre attack. Pre
attack work. More and more, pre planning.

Cutting the fuel break and they designated certain areas for the fire
camps and stuff like that. Right now they got maps, everything is
designated to where they go. It's all preplanned.

Chilao was up on top?

Right, that's the high country on the Angeles.

Chilao moved around to other forests? Yeah, during fires we'd go to
other forests.

If they needed us out of state, I know I went to Colorado a few times
with the hotshot crew. At that time, they used to fly us. You don't
get a first class flight here. You're flying in an old military plane.
They gear you up with a parachute and everything.

They give you crash training on what to do if something happens. Jump.

How long had you fought fire before joining Chilao?

I fought fire with an organized crew, for about, probably about two
years.

Brush hook era

We had used to configure the brush hooks with the chain saws. We
didn't have no chain saws in those days.

In timber country, we used to carry those hand saws. They called them
misery whips. Crosscut saws. We used them on timber fires or lightning
fires, to cut the tree or something.

Tjunga District used to be part of Arroyo Seco District. 4 to 5
Districts on Angeles. The hotshots used to live in the houses, in the
old CCC buildings (At Chilao)

Dick Dorn hired Joe. Ran the Texas Canyon Hotshots as a Zuni crew.

**Interview**: Lynn Biddison

**Crew:** Chalio

**Date**: 6/19/92

They started in Southern Calif. It was a name to distinguish them from
anybody else. Who actually came up with it, I don't know.

Started on the Angeles, then on San Bernardino as District Ranger,
then FCO

I started on an engine crew, what they called tankers in those days,
engine crew member in Soledad canyon in 1943. You could start when you
were 16 in those days.

I was extremely fortunate to hold every job in the fire organization
from a crewmember to the director of aviation and fire control for
both R3 & R5. Every job in the fire organization except smoke jumping.
I was really fortunate. I was really lucky.

Superintendent of Chilao 1950

I left the crew in August of 1953, I became assistant ranger and
district FCO on Arroyo Seco Dist. Ray Bond actually succeeded
Biedebach and he was there for a year. I was a foreman for Ray. Then I
became the superintendent for 51, 52 & 53.

The biggest change was primarily in the numbers (of crews) but also
they travel a lot more than we did in those days. For example, on the
Angeles, we had both Chilao & Oak Grove, that's all they had at that
time. Because both of them were financed from special Los Angeles
River Flood money, one of the two had to be on the forest at all
times. So that restricted the amount of travel you could do to other
forests.

I was there, they had the first hot superintendent's meeting they ever
had about 4 years ago in Portland. I was invited to come up and sat
there in the back of the room. I listened to those superintendents
talk and I thought. My God, am I glad I was superintendent in the 50s
and not today. Because all I had to worry about at that time was
whether we had food, water, tools and putting the fire out. Today that
is the least of their worries. They're so damn wrapped in the social
issues, they don't have time to worry about what they were hired to
do. From my standpoint, I was just damn glad I don't have to put up
with the crap that superintendents have to put up with today.

We were there to do a job and we could do that job.

They tell a story about Jim Smith, superintendent of the Fulton Hot
Shots several years ago. When he first had females on the crew. Jim,
as you may or may not know is a minority and a super neat guy. He had
several females and they just could not keep up with the crew even
walking into project work. Finally he went to the District Ranger and
said' this is not right, they can't keep up with the crew. I always
have to leave a squad boss behind with 'em'. The District Rangers
response was: Your standards are too high, lower them. Horrible.

Los Padres Chilao Oak Grove Del Rosa Laguna

original 5 crews

There were a lot of Blister Rust Crews in those early days. There was
a lot of competition between those crews and some of those BRC crews
were very good crews. They didn't have any money for things like that
in Southern California, it was just purely fire dollars. I guess the
hot shot was the name originated there. Part of it, at least was to
distinguish them from all those other crews. There were a lot of other
crews that were financed from money other fire. But they were hand
crews, just like hot shot crews were. Even in those days we had, what
are now type II crews. They were Mexican nationals (braceros). Hell,
those guys used to come out there, their shoes were thongs made out of
tires. Good workers, never any complaints and if there was, nobody
understood 'em. Cause you couldn't talk to 'em. But they were good.

The SWFFs came out of Region 3, the Mescalero Red Hats. Those were
good crews but the Hot Shots were always the standard from which
everything was measured.

For example, when I was at Chilao. The Del Rosa's. They were tough.
They had one of the colleges, Chaffey College or one of the colleges
in the San Bernardino area. They had the football team on there. Or a
good part of it. That was their summer conditioning program. They were
tough. A lot of competition. There was no fooling around. You either
did the job or you got somebody that would.

One of the things that was unique in those days at Chilao, was that we
had a year round hot shot crew. We started that in 51, it went thru
54. It was a year round crew. They did a lot of project work when they
weren't on fire suppression or training.

When I was superintendent, it was an inmate crew; San Quinten
prisoners. In 50 it wasn't it, It was a freeman crew. All Indian, they
were all students at Sherman Institute at Riverside. In 51 we went to
San Quinten prisoners. That was a real education for a young person
like myself, and all the rest of our foremen. The first 3 months, they
tried everything, and once they figured out what the limits were. It
was neat then. One of the things you found, one of the reasons those
people were in prison was they didn't get there because they liked to
work. If you set the standards, and they would meet those standards
just as well as any other hot shot crew. That proved to me that
people, no matter who they are and what they've done in their lives.
They will meet any expectation you set for 'em, if you go about it in
the right way. And they did that. But for the first 60 days, they
tried us every which way they could. Just to see what they could get
away with. It's understandable. Pretty soon after that it was all
right. That was the year around hot shot crew. It was the only one, I
guess they ever had. It was 1951, 52, 53 and 54.

Chilao was discontinued in '81. I was director of fire and aviation in
the region at the time. Ben Clar, one of my assistants said we gotta
cut hotshot crews and Chilao because of these criteria falls out. I
didn't like that but his analysis made sense. We did it but that hurt
me.

Oak Grove went down before Chilao but no sure when that happened.

Two Tours on San Bernardino. District Ranger on Cajon District from
'56 to 60. FCO on Cleveland 60 to 64

FCO on San Bernardino 64 to 68

3rd generation Forest Service, all worked on the Angeles.

My grandfather was the first forest guard in Bouquet Canyon.

My father was a technician on the Sagus. He was the first Assistant
Fire Control Officer on the Angeles, and the first AFCO in the nation
as far as I know. He'd been district FCO on Arroyo Seco and the Sagus
before that. Be he'd started in the CCC program.

He'd been a foreman in the CCC program.

Mill Creek and Converse are one and the same. On the same district.
Converse is where the station is. Mill Creek is the Ranger Dist.

San Jack, San Jacinto is Vista Grande. San Jacinto RD Del Rosas.

Got hot shots started in Region 3.

When I first came to the region in '68, they didn't really have a fire
plan that was done to national standards. So we did a fire plan to
national standards and found that we needed all these things. By using
the manning plan and money that was available through action and
specific action and management we were able to start all those crews.
The first hot shot crew in the region was the Negrito. There was
special money available in Region 3 for employment of people in
northern New Mexico. We were able to use that money to start the
Negrito Hot Shots. We hired all the people for the crew out of
northern New Mexico. And just put 'em on the Gila. That's how the
program started.

Once we made a fire plan that met national standards, they had never
done that in Region

3\. Then what we did, in those days, they had an item called; specific
manning and action plan. It authorized the use of emergency funds, when
you met certain fire conditions. That's how we started to finance all
those crews. Then after a while it became a regular budget item.

The most we had at one time was 16. I think there are 14 now. Some
crews that call themselves hot shot crews that really are not.

I'm not sure, don't know how to say that..they call themselves hot
shots, but aren't part of the national system of recognized hot shot
crews.

Hot Shot Crews.

Those were purely Southern California entities, it was while I was on
the Cleveland as Fire Control Officer and El Cariso was there at the
time and it was about '62 that the Washington Office, when Merle
Outten was the director of fire and aviation for the Forest Service,
put out an edict that those were now national resources, not just
southern california resources and they became part of the way they
were financed. Money was earmarked by Washington for those particular
crews. But they weren't considered to be national resources until
about '62. They just became a national resource.

We were on an airplane every once in a while. Buses really didn't come
about until I was Fire Control Officer on the San Bernardino. About
'66 or '67, the Del Rosa crew was on a fire on the Angeles. One of the
stake sides went off the road and rolled down the mountain and a
couple of kids were killed. That led to the Forest Supervisor, Don
Bauer, being very emphatic in his instructions to me that we were
gonna start putting those people in buses. There weren't any using
buses until '68. That was what brought the buses was the accident with
the Del Rosa Hot Shot Crew.

We pulled some long trips in the back end of those trucks. Really, the
size of the hot shot crews were dictated by the capacity of the stake
bed. That's how the numbers were established. The old CC crews were 32
people and they had benches they sat on crosswise. Had to carry all
our tools and our bags and all that. We had to make boxes down either
side and cross the front and on top were the seats and you could only
get 20 people in there. No matter what they did. That's how the size
of the crew was established. By the size of the trucks.

It happened long before the airplane. We tried to cut 'em to 18 at one
time, when I was in Region 3, because we could get that many on a Twin
Otter.

Region 3. They used the SWFF crews primarily.(Before hotshots) Just
took a long time to get 'em going.

The FS: They've almost become a social agency rather than a land
management agency. It's not as true in Region 3 as it is in Region 5.
Or any other region as it is in Region 5. There the Consent Decree is
the real problem. That judge said:" your work force will be
proportional to the population. If there's 43% women in the
population, 43% of your work force will be women." By God, he meant
it.

The FS was the training ground. On the Angeles, we went through a
period where we were a training ground for the Los Angeles County Fire
Department. And then the whole of Region 5 was a training ground for
CDF. There are some pluses to that. Course there are some minuses. As
far as cooperation out on the fireline and all that. It's a real plus.

You know 'em and you can trust 'em. Worked out really well in that
respect but it was sure hard on your programs.

The hot shots are probably the soft spot in my heart.

No matter what job I held in the outfit, that was my favorite.

It's the Marine Corps of the whole fire organization. There's nothing
they can't do. When they arrive, they're prepared to go on the line
and stay there. We were proud of that. You could do things no other
crews could do. You were proud, the most difficult part of the fire,
that's where you were.

**Leaders We Would Like to Meet - Lynn Biddison by Jim Cook and Mark
Linane**

[[http://www.fireleadership.gov/toolbox/leaders\_meet/interviews/leaders\_LynBiddison.ht]{.underline}](http://www.fireleadership.gov/toolbox/leaders_meet/interviews/leaders_LynBiddison.html)
[[ml]{.underline}](http://www.fireleadership.gov/toolbox/leaders_meet/interviews/leaders_LynBiddison.html)

**Interview**: Toby Ortega

**Crew:** Del Rosa

**Date**: 7/21/94

Started fighting fire in 1938, as a volunteer. I was born in Banning,
CA. I must have been 16, 17, (when I started fighting fire)

My first fire was over in the Arrowhead District.

A big major one was the Bull Canyon Fire over below Palm Springs.

I got to know most of the Rangers, Porky (John) Harris, he was well
known here on the San Bernardino Forest. Scotty Bowman, Bill Clark,
all were involved in the CCCs.

Whenever there was a fire in the Santa Rosa Mountains or anyplace,
they would send the Forest Service truck or a CC truck and anybody
that was qualified or, they were screened pretty well, as far as
health. They got to know me. I was the first one on the truck. It was
to my advantage. Every summer they'd come and pick me up, they
wouldn't make you do stuff like they used to. When I was a kid, I
remember the police used to stop the cars, and stop them and say:
"you're going to fight fires" and off they went. When I started, they
brought the truck near the police station or anyplace here in town.
Word got around and everybody volunteered. Whoever wanted to go. A lot
people didn't want to go. Most of the guys my age, they volunteered,
they wanted to go.

From then on, John Harris. (He said) "You guys want to fight fire, why
don't you join the CC Camps." So, we went to the CC Camps. At Mill
Creek, City Creek and Del Rosa.

When I got known through most of the people, they would have the
first, second and third suppression. Which was the crew trucks. When I
went into the camp, I was assigned to the second suppression. I guess,
some of the people that I knew, said: "he don't belong in the second
suppression, he belongs in the first suppression." So we were the
first out. Then the war came.

(spent 2 years in the Army, got out in 45)

When they started (Del Rosa) it was 1946, like you say, and they would
engage on various fires and then they would assign them at Converse as
a road crew.

(Ortega was on 1946 Del Rosa Hotshots)

Then in 1947, they moved the camp to Sycamore Flats on the Cajon
District and we were the hotshot crew from there.

1948 out of Del Rosa, the whole camp was moved to Del Rosa. (Current
location)

The old house used to be where the dispatch was.

I worked for George McClarity. Both of them worked together, George
and Gordon (Boesteader).

(How many years as a hotshot?)

About 11, I guess. In between, as District Rangers and Fire Control
Officers, knew me, they would offer me jobs as Tank Truck Operator or
a Foreman on a suppression crew. On a fire truck.

In '49, I went to work out of Sycamore as a Tank Truck Operator.

1950, I went back to Del Rosa with Del Rosa Hotshot crew. As they
gathered for both crews, they assigned Al Stewart as a foreman and me
as a crew boss and we opened the first camp out at Vista Grande. There
was nothing to cover (that area) as far as a hotshot crew.

In '51, I guess they decided they wanted both crews back at Del Rosa.

It was originally the first hotshot crew out of here, Vista Grande
Hotshot crew. They had the tanker crew, which wasn't part of us. But
they had the hotshot crew there.

(Del Rosa moved over there?)

No, it was completely different. At Del Rosa, they split the crews,
one went here and the other stayed at Del Rosa. We had maybe 15, 18
people down here, and they did too.

'51 we went back to Del Rosa, we worked out of there. '52 we did the
thing, we worked out of Del Rosa.

In '53 I went as a foreman, to one of the stations, as a crew foreman.
'54

'55, I went back to Del Rosa, as a hotshot crew. As a crew boss. '56,
Still\...

'57 I was a crew foreman. '58, '59

'61, I went as a foreman to one of the stations.

From then I went '62 or '62 as a camp superintendent and we traveled
out of state.

That was the end of my Forest Service career, then I went to Edwards
Air Force Base on the fire department. I worked as tank truck operator
or engineer as I guess they called them. I worked as a crew chief
assigned as a house captain.

(63 to 77 at AFB, I retired) Bill Stevens, he took it over.

Ernie Lemlin, he came after Bill.

Bud Parrott(?) he was under my supervision.

Joe Cottier (out of Del Rosa, he was one of the crew foremen)

Andy Horene

(A superintendent, a crew foreman and two squad bosses) What was
hotshotting like?

Levi's and work boots and suntan shirt, that was our uniform. In 1950,
they didn't emphasize hardhats yet. I would say about 1952, they
started bearing down. We used to go up north and work on timber fires,
safety comes first. Then it was mandatory, even when we used to. The
college boys went to go back to school in September and they

brought in the Indians from New Mexico, they were mandatory that they
wore hardhats, which they were not used to.

I remember we had this big fire on this range right here. I came in
with a loaded crew. They said: "we got to leave Friday, cause we go to
school Monday". I went back with three men to Del Rosa. Then we
started bringing in Mexicans or Indians.

They were a hassle, those Indians. They were good workers but no
regimentation. You had to teach them. Don't walk behind a man with
your tool over your shoulder and all that stuff. The safety. You had
to show them all this.

To me, I was, in other words, raised with George McClarty and Gordon
Boesteader and they were very strict. There was no, It was that way,
even when I went to the superintendent, I was the same way. I was a
bad guy, but there was nothing I could do about it.

Off season?

I worked for the road crew, I was a crew pusher, I'd still hold like
my rank. I'd push the crew. We'd build new road, drainage, anything.
I'd still push the crew. They'd bring people from other districts to
work out of Del Rosa and I'd push them.

What changed over the years in firefighting styles.

I would say less (aggressive), cause even now I see, they depend too
much on like aircraft or "we won't move til we make a drop here or til
they make a drop for us." When I was a crew foreman for one of the
fire stations, I wouldn't hesitate for somebody to tell me: "Well, you
go from here to there, or go do this". I did what I had to do and I'd
do it.

Same way with a hotshot crew. We traveled.

Carl Hickerson, I knew him well. He knew my capabilities. I'd go to
plans, he'd give me the layout and that was it. Cause I, like I said,
I'm from the old school.

Airtankers:

They used the Stearmans, the two wingers. They'd drop the stuff,
they'd be pretty high and they'd drop the stuff, you know. Now, they
have more sophisticated aircraft.

I go to those these fire musters. I meet some people I know and some
that I don't.

I tell them, like the fire down here; we'd be up there, they'd leave
us on a ridge for a couple of days. They'd drop equipment to us, food
and juice. Stuff like that.

They'd say: "you're kidding!" No, I'm not. That's the way it was. You
had your shovel, your ax, your pulaskis, your brush hooks, your light.
You did the best you could, they didn't put you in a helicopter and
brought you back and forth.

I enjoyed, mainly, the hotshot crew.

A lot of people ask me: "what do you do it for? Do you do it for the
glory?" No, I said. I like it.

We went to a fire in Santa Barbara, one of the big fires. The Coyote
Fire.

We had, I had a very good crew. But they came out of Pennsylvania, New
York. Some locals. I remember Robbins was the other foreman and he
stayed behind and he said: "take the crew and go up and see what you
can do with this hot line that is going up

here." I told the crew; take your shelters, your tents. I was watching
as the fire kept burning. It was at night. It was acting funny. It was
doing this, like a wave.

I told the crew; we're gonna get very hot, embers are going to fall on
you and all that. You're going to get burned, you can bet on that.
It's going to be smoky, it's gonna be bad. We hit that fire, a
firestorm, whew! It looked like an ocean. The fire turned toward the
ocean, came down slope. I remember the crew at Del Rosa, when we got
back, they gathered around and said: "thank you, Toby, for saving our
lives."

I said; I didn't save your lives, it's just, I know fire behavior.
This is experience. Some of you guys that are going to forestry
school, you'll learn that through experience. It's no magic or
anything like that.

Trucks? Flat bed trucks?

On both sides they had tool boxes and they sit on them. They had a
sign on the back, a sign on the front: Fire Crew. Then on the side, we
had the Del Rosa Hotshot Crew or Vista Grande Crew. They enjoyed that
open air. When it got hot, I remember, the guy in front, against the
cab, would get a canteen, turn it over, and whoosh.

Vista Grande?

1950 was a split crew with Del Rosa.

They did the same thing on the Mill Creek with Converse. They had the
Converse Hotshot Crew. They would work the same way we did up here. I
guess the district funded them, or someway they funded them too, just
at Converse.

Insignia/Big Horn Sheep?

The only thing we had was an emblem, that looked like a Forest Service
patch. It was red and yellow and said: San Bernardino National Forest
but it didn't say hotshot crew or anything like that. On the helmets,
they had a decal that said; Del Rosa Hotshot Crew. At Vista Grande we
didn't have anything

When we went to Elko, Nevada. That's all flat land but they've got
brush, it burns fast! We're used to climbing hills. It was nothing but
flat land!

At El Cariso, a guy by the name of Gordon, he was with the hotshot
crew, he was under my supervision then. He stayed with them and he
transferred to the Cleveland. I think he was foreman with El Cariso.
Gordon King. I think he got hurt in one of the fires down there one
summer.

Cleveland Hot shots started?

I would say in the '50s. Cause I remember Pittman, I think he must
have been a crew boss or foreman.

When I interview people that were coming to the hotshot crew, I would
tell 'em: I ain't going to pull no bones, it's hard work. It's a dirty
job. You'll be out all night pounding brush. I says: so, you better
make up your mind. You either want it or you don't want it. Most of
them stuck it out. I could tell, like two o'clock in the morning, I
could tell, "why

did I get myself into this?" I'd tell 'em: I told you it was rough
work. But they stuck it out. I think it was only one, that can I
remember. He had girlfriend problems mainly. It wasn't on account of
the work, but most of them stuck it out.

The superintendent at Del Rosa told us, he says: "they have a crew at
Los Padres", I think Campbell was in charge. "Los Padres is the number
one hotshot crew". It was just coincidence that we went to a fire and
worked with them. To me, I'm not trying to make points or anything
like that, but I think we worked them.

We used to compete all the time with others, cause Del Rosa was well
known. We worked with the Cleveland, we worked with the Los Padres,
the Angeles. Dalton, Texas Canyon.

Marcel Ortega, Toby. I used to fool around with boxing gloves once in
a while.
